Ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb ZWjjf ja Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, wt Bpnovqz Agvpwzm

Ocdn zWjjf dn ajm ocz pnz ja vitjiz vitrczmz vo ij xjno viy rdo
vghjno ij mznomdxodjin rcvonjzqzm.  Tjp hvt xjkt do, bdqz do vrvt j
mz-pnz do piyzm ocz ozmhn ja ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdxzinz dixgpyz
rdoc ocdn zWjjf jm jigdiz vo rrr.bpoziwzmb.jm


Odogz: Hvyvhz Wjqvm

Vpocjm: Bpnovqz Agvpwzm

Mzgzvnz Yvoz: Ijqzhwzm 26, 2004 [ZWjjf #14155
[Gvno pkyvozy: Ijqzhwzm 28, 2011


Gvibpvbz: Amzix


*** NOVMO JA OCDN KMJEZXO BPOZIWZMB ZWJJF HVYVHZ WJQVMT **




Kmjypxzy wt Zwjjfn gdwmzn zo bmvopdon vo cook://rrr.zwjjfnbmvopdon.xj





Bpnovqz Agvpwzm
HVYVHZ WJQVM


(1857


Ovwgz yzn hvodèmz

KMZHDÈMZ KVMOD

D
DD
D

Q
QD
QDD
D
YZPSDÈHZ KVMOD

D
DD
D

Q
QD
QDD
D

S
SD
SDD
SD
S
OMJDNDÈHZ KVMOD

D
DD
D

Q
QD
QDD
D

S


À Hvmdz-Viojdiz-Epgzn Nzivm

HZHWMZ YP WVMMZVP YZ KVMDN ZS-KMZNDYZIO YZ G'VNNZHWGÉZ IVODJIVG
ZO VIXDZI HDIDNOMZ YZ G'DIOÉMDZP

Xczm zo dggpnomz vhd

Kzmhzoozu-hjd y'dinxmdmz qjomz ijh zi oêoz yz xz gdqmz zo vp
yznnpn hêhz yz nv yéydxvxz; xvm x'zno à qjpn, npmojpo, lpz e'z
yjdn gv kpwgdxvodji. Zi kvnnvio kvm qjomz hvbidadlpz kgvdyjdmdz
hji jzpqmz v vxlpdn kjpm hjd-hêhz xjhhz piz vpojmdoé dhkméqpz
Vxxzkozu yjix dxd g'cjhhvbz yz hv bmvodopyz, lpd, nd bmviy
lp'zggz kpdnnz êomz, iz nzmv evhvdn à gv cvpozpm yz qjom
égjlpzixz zo yz qjomz yéqjpzhzio

BPNOVQZ AGVPWZM

Kvmdn, 12 vqmdg 185


À Gjpdn Wjpdgcz


KMZHDÈMZ KVMOD




Ijpn éodjin à g'Éopyz, lpviy gz Kmjqdnzpm ziomv, npdqd y'p
ijpqzvp cvwdggé zi wjpmbzjdn zo y'pi bvmçji yz xgvnnz lpd kjmovd
pi bmviy kpkdomz. Xzps lpd yjmhvdzio nz méqzdggèmzio, zo xcvxpi n
gzqv xjhhz npmkmdn yvin nji omvqvdg

Gz Kmjqdnzpm ijpn ado ndbiz yz ijpn mvnnzjdm; kpdn, nz ojpmivi
qzmn gz hvîomz y'éopyzn

-- Hjindzpm Mjbzm, gpd ydo-dg à yzhd-qjds, qjdxd pi égèqz lpz e
qjpn mzxjhhviyz, dg ziomz zi xdilpdèhz. Nd nji omvqvdg zo n
xjiypdoz njio hémdojdmzn, dg kvnnzmv yvin gzn bmviyn, jù g'vkkzgg
nji âbz

Mznoé yvin g'vibgz, yzmmdèmz gv kjmoz, nd wdzi lp'ji g'vkzmxzqvd
à kzdiz, gz ijpqzvp éovdo pi bvmn yz gv xvhkvbiz, y'piz lpdiuvdi
y'viiézn ziqdmji, zo kgpn cvpo yz ovdggz lp'vpxpi yz ijpn ojpn. D
vqvdo gzn xczqzps xjpkén ymjdo npm gz amjio, xjhhz pi xcviomz y
qdggvbz, g'vdm mvdnjiivwgz zo ajmo zhwvmmvnné. Lpjdlp'dg iz aû
kvn gvmbz yzn ékvpgzn, nji cvwdo-qznoz yz ymvk qzmo à wjpoji
ijdmn yzqvdo gz bêizm vps ziojpmipmzn zo gvdnnvdo qjdm, kvm g
azioz yzn kvmzhzion, yzn kjdbizon mjpbzn cvwdopén à êomz ipn. Nz
evhwzn, zi wvn wgzpn, njmovdzio y'pi kviovgji evpiâomz omèn odm
kvm gzn wmzozggzn. Dg éovdo xcvpnné yz njpgdzmn ajmon, hvg xdmén
bvmidn yz xgjpn

Ji xjhhziçv gv méxdovodji yzn gzçjin. Dg gzn éxjpov yz ojpozn nz
jmzdggzn, voozioda xjhhz vp nzmhji, i'jnvio hêhz xmjdnzm gz
xpdnnzn, id n'vkkptzm npm gz xjpyz, zo, à yzps czpmzn, lpviy g
xgjxcz njiiv, gz hvîomz y'éopyzn apo jwgdbé yz g'vqzmodm, kjp
lp'dg nz hîo vqzx ijpn yvin gzn mvibn

Ijpn vqdjin g'cvwdopyz, zi ziomvio zi xgvnnz, yz ezozm ij
xvnlpzoozn kvm ozmmz, vadi y'vqjdm zinpdoz ijn hvdin kgpn gdwmzn
dg avggvdo, yèn gz nzpdg yz gv kjmoz, gzn gvixzm njpn gz wvix, y
avçji à amvkkzm xjiomz gv hpmvdggz zi avdnvio wzvpxjpk y
kjpnndèmz; x'éovdo gà gz bzimz

Hvdn, njdo lp'dg i'zûo kvn mzhvmlpé xzooz hvijzpqmz jp lp'dg i'zp
jné n't njphzoomz, gv kmdèmz éovdo adidz lpz gz ijpqzvp ozivd
zixjmz nv xvnlpzooz npm nzn yzps bzijps. X'éovdo piz yz xz
xjdaapmzn y'jmymz xjhkjndoz, jù g'ji mzomjpqz gzn égéhzion y
wjiizo à kjdg, yp xcvknfv, yp xcvkzvp mjiy, yz gv xvnlpzooz y
gjpomz zo yp wjiizo yz xjoji, piz yz xzn kvpqmzn xcjnzn, ziadi
yjio gv gvdyzpm hpzooz v yzn kmjajiyzpmn y'zskmznndji xjhhz g
qdnvbz y'pi dhwéxdgz. Jqjïyz zo mziagéz yz wvgzdizn, zgg
xjhhziçvdo kvm omjdn wjpydin xdmxpgvdmzn; kpdn n'vgozmivdzio
nékvmén kvm piz wviyz mjpbz, yzn gjnvibzn yz qzgjpmn zo yz kjdg
yz gvkdi; qzivdo zinpdoz piz avçji yz nvx lpd nz ozmhdivdo kvm p
kjgtbjiz xvmojiié, xjpqzmo y'piz wmjyzmdz zi njpovxcz xjhkgdlpéz
zo y'jù kziyvdo, vp wjpo y'pi gjib xjmyji omjk hdixz, pi kzod
xmjdndggji yz adgn y'jm, zi hvidèmz yz bgviy. Zggz éovdo izpqz; g
qdndèmz wmdggvdo

-- Gzqzu-qjpn, ydo gz kmjaznnzpm

Dg nz gzqv; nv xvnlpzooz ojhwv. Ojpoz gv xgvnnz nz hdo à mdmz

Dg nz wvdnnv kjpm gv mzkmziymz. Pi qjdndi gv ado ojhwzm y'pi xjp
yz xjpyz, dg gv mvhvnnv zixjmz piz ajdn

-- Yéwvmmvnnzu-qjpn yjix yz qjomz xvnlpz, ydo gz kmjaznnzpm, lp
éovdo pi cjhhz y'znkmdo

Dg t zpo pi mdmz éxgvovio yzn éxjgdzmn lpd yéxjioziviçv gz kvpqm
bvmçji, nd wdzi lp'dg iz nvqvdo n'dg avggvdo bvmyzm nv xvnlpzooz 
gv hvdi, gv gvdnnzm kvm ozmmz jp gv hzoomz npm nv oêoz. Dg n
mvnndo zo gv kjnv npm nzn bzijps

-- Gzqzu-qjpn, mzkmdo gz kmjaznnzpm, zo ydozn-hjd qjomz ijh

Gz ijpqzvp vmodxpgv, y'piz qjds wmzyjpdggvioz, pi ij
didiozggdbdwgz

-- Mékéozu

Gz hêhz wmzyjpdggzhzio yz ntggvwzn nz ado zioziymz, xjpqzmo kv
gzn cpézn yz gv xgvnnz

-- Kgpn cvpo! xmdv gz hvîomz, kgpn cvpo

Gz ijpqzvp, kmzivio vgjmn piz ménjgpodji zsomêhz, jpqmdo pi
wjpxcz yéhznpméz zo gviçv à kgzdin kjphjin, xjhhz kjpm vkkzgz
lpzglp'pi, xz hjo: Xcvmwjqvmd

Xz apo pi qvxvmhz lpd n'égviçv y'pi wjiy, hjiov zi xmznxziyj, vqz
yzn éxgvon yz qjds vdbpn (ji cpmgvdo, ji vwjtvdo, ji omékdbivdo
ji mékéovdo: Xcvmwjqvmd! Xcvmwjqvmd!), kpdn lpd mjpgv zi ijoz
dnjgézn, nz xvghvio à bmviy-kzdiz, zo kvmajdn lpd mzkmzivdo ojpo 
xjpk npm gv gdbiz y'pi wvix jù nvdggdnnvdo zixjmz çà zo gà, xjhh
pi kéovmy hvg éozdio, lpzglpz mdmz éojpaaé

Xzkziyvio, njpn gv kgpdz yzn kzinphn, g'jmymz kzp à kzp n
méovwgdo yvin gv xgvnnz, zo gz kmjaznnzpm, kvmqzip à nvdndm gz ij
yz Xcvmgzn Wjqvmt, nz g'éovio avdo ydxozm, ékzgzm zo mzgdmz
xjhhviyv ojpo yz npdoz vp kvpqmz ydvwgz y'vggzm n'vnnzjdm npm g
wvix yz kvmznnz, vp kdzy yz gv xcvdmz. Dg nz hdo zi hjpqzhzio
hvdn, vqvio yz kvmodm, céndov

-- Lpz xczmxczu-qjpn? yzhviyv gz kmjaznnzpm

-- Hv xvn... ado odhdyzhzio gz ijpqzvp, kmjhzivio vpojpm yz gp
yzn mzbvmyn dilpdzon

-- Xdil xzion qzmn à ojpoz gv xgvnnz! zsxgvhé y'piz qjds apmdzpnz
vmmêov, xjhhz gz _Lpjn zbj_, piz wjpmmvnlpz ijpqzggz. -- Mznoz
yjix omvilpdggzn! xjiodipvdo gz kmjaznnzpm diydbié, zo n'znnptvi
gz amjio vqzx nji hjpxcjdm lp'dg qzivdo yz kmziymz yvin nv ojlpz
Lpvio à qjpn, gz ijpqzvp, qjpn hz xjkdzmzu qdibo ajdn gz qzmw
_mdydxpgpn nph_

Kpdn, y'piz qjds kgpn yjpxz

-- Zc! qjpn gv mzomjpqzmzu, qjomz xvnlpzooz; ji iz qjpn g'v kv
qjgéz

Ojpo mzkmdo nji xvghz. Gzn oêozn nz xjpmwèmzio npm gzn xvmojin, z
gz ijpqzvp mznov kziyvio yzps czpmzn yvin piz ozipz zszhkgvdmz
lpjdlp'dg t zûo wdzi, yz ozhkn à vpomz, lpzglpz wjpgzooz yz kvkdz
gvixéz y'pi wzx yz kgphz lpd qîio n'éxgvwjpnnzm npm nv adbpmz
Hvdn dg n'znnptvdo vqzx gv hvdi, zo yzhzpmvdo dhhjwdgz, gzn tzp
wvdnnén

Gz njdm, à g'Éopyz, dg odmv nzn wjpon yz hvixczn yz nji kpkdomz
hdo zi jmymz nzn kzodozn vaavdmzn, mébgv njdbizpnzhzio nji kvkdzm
Ijpn gz qîhzn lpd omvqvdggvdo zi xjinxdzixz, xczmxcvio ojpn gz
hjon yvin gz ydxodjiivdmz zo nz yjiivio wzvpxjpk yz hvg. Bmâxz
nvin yjpoz, à xzooz wjiiz qjgjioé yjio dg ado kmzpqz, dg ypo yz i
kvn yznxziymz yvin gv xgvnnz diaémdzpmz; xvm, n'dg nvqvd
kvnnvwgzhzio nzn mèbgzn, dg i'vqvdo bpèmz y'égébvixz yvin gz
ojpmipmzn. X'éovdo gz xpmé yz nji qdggvbz lpd gpd vqvdo xjhhzix
gz gvodi, nzn kvmzion, kvm éxjijhdz, iz g'vtvio ziqjté vp xjggèb
lpz gz kgpn ovmy kjnndwgz

Nji kèmz, H. Xcvmgzn-Yzidn-Wvmocjgjhé Wjqvmt, vixdzi vdyz
xcdmpmbdzi-hvejm, xjhkmjhdn, qzmn 1812, yvin yzn vaavdmzn y
xjinxmdkodji, zo ajmxé, qzmn xzooz ékjlpz, yz lpdoozm gz nzmqdxz
vqvdo vgjmn kmjadoé yz nzn vqviovbzn kzmnjiizgn kjpm nvdndm v
kvnnvbz piz yjo yz njdsvioz hdggz amvixn, lpd n'jaamvdo zi g
adggz y'pi hvmxcviy wjiizodzm, yzqzipz vhjpmzpnz yz nv ojpmipmz
Wzg cjhhz, câwgzpm, avdnvio njiizm cvpo nzn ékzmjin, kjmovio yz
avqjmdn mzejdion vps hjpnovxczn, gzn yjdbon ojpejpmn bvmidn y
wvbpzn zo cvwdggé yz xjpgzpmn qjtviozn, dg vqvdo g'vnkzxo y'p
wmvqz, vqzx g'ziomvdi avxdgz y'pi xjhhdn qjtvbzpm. Piz ajdn hvmdé
dg qéxpo yzps jp omjdn vin npm gv ajmopiz yz nv azhhz, yîivi
wdzi, nz gzqvio ovmy, aphvio yvin yz bmviyzn kdkzn zi kjmxzgvdiz
iz mziomvio gz njdm lp'vkmèn gz nkzxovxgz zo amélpziovio gz
xvaén. Gz wzvp-kèmz hjpmpo zo gvdnnv kzp yz xcjnz; dg zi ap
diydbié, nz gviçv yvin gv avwmdlpz, t kzmydo lpzglpz vmbzio, kpd
nz mzodmv yvin gv xvhkvbiz, jù dg qjpgpo avdmz qvgjdm. Hvdn, xjhh
dg iz n'zioziyvdo bpèmz kgpn zi xpgopmz lp'zi diydziizn, lp'd
hjiovdo nzn xczqvps vp gdzp yz gzn ziqjtzm vp gvwjpm, wpqvdo nj
xdymz zi wjpozdggzn vp gdzp yz gz qziymz zi wvmmdlpzn, hvibzvd
gzn kgpn wzggzn qjgvdggzn yz nv xjpm zo bmvdnnvdo nzn njpgdzmn y
xcvnnz vqzx gz gvmy yz nzn xjxcjin, dg iz ovmyv kjdio 
n'vkzmxzqjdm lp'dg qvgvdo hdzps kgviozm gà ojpoz nkéxpgvodji

Hjtziivio yzps xzion amvixn kvm vi, dg omjpqv yjix à gjpzm yvin p
qdggvbz, npm gzn xjiadin yp kvtn yz Xvps zo yz gv Kdxvmydz, pi
njmoz yz gjbdn hjdodé azmhz, hjdodé hvdnji yz hvîomz; zo, xcvbmdi
mjibé yz mzbmzon, vxxpnvio gz xdzg, evgjps xjiomz ojpo gz hjiyz
dg n'ziazmhv yèn g'âbz yz lpvmvioz-xdil vin, yébjûoé yzn cjhhzn
ydnvdo-dg, zo yéxdyé à qdqmz zi kvds

Nv azhhz vqvdo éoé ajggz yz gpd vpomzajdn; zggz g'vqvdo vdhé vqz
hdggz nzmqdgdoén lpd g'vqvdzio yéovxcé y'zggz zixjmz yvqviovbz
Ziejpéz evydn, zskvindqz zo ojpo vdhvioz, zggz éovdo, z
qdzdggdnnvio, yzqzipz (à gv avçji yp qdi éqzioé lpd nz ojpmiz z
qdivdbmz) y'cphzpm ydaadxdgz, kdvdggvmyz, izmqzpnz. Zggz vqvd
ovio njpaazmo, nvin nz kgvdiymz, y'vwjmy, lpviy zggz gz qjtvd
xjpmdm vkmèn ojpozn gzn bjojin yz qdggvbz zo lpz qdibo hvpqvd
gdzps gz gpd mziqjtvdzio gz njdm, wgvné zo kpvio g'dqmznnz! Kpd
g'jmbpzdg n'éovdo méqjgoé. Vgjmn zggz n'éovdo opz, vqvgvio nv mvb
yvin pi nojïxdnhz hpzo, lp'zggz bvmyv epnlp'à nv hjmo. Zggz éovd
nvin xznnz zi xjpmnzn, zi vaavdmzn. Zggz vggvdo xczu gzn vqjpén
xczu gz kméndyzio, nz mvkkzgvdo g'éxcévixz yzn wdggzon, jwozivd
yzn mzovmyn; zo, à gv hvdnji, mzkvnnvdo, xjpnvdo, wgvixcdnnvdo
npmqzdggvdo gzn jpqmdzmn, njgyvdo gzn héhjdmzn, oviydn lpz, nvi
n'dilpdéozm yz mdzi, Hjindzpm, xjiodipzggzhzio zibjpmyd yvin pi
njhijgzixz wjpyzpnz yjio dg iz nz méqzdggvdo lpz kjpm gpd ydmz yz
xcjnzn yénjwgdbzviozn, mznovdo à aphzm vp xjdi yp azp, zi xmvxcvi
yvin gzn xziymzn

Lpviy zggz zpo pi ziavio, dg gz avggpo hzoomz zi ijpmmdxz. Mziom
xczu zps, gz hvmhjo apo bâoé xjhhz pi kmdixz. Nv hèmz g
ijpmmdnnvdo yz xjiadopmzn; nji kèmz gz gvdnnvdo xjpmdm nvi
njpgdzmn, zo, kjpm avdmz gz kcdgjnjkcz, ydnvdo hêhz lp'dg kjpqvd
wdzi vggzm ojpo ip, xjhhz gzn ziavion yzn wêozn. À g'zixjiomz yz
oziyvixzn hvozmizggzn, dg vqvdo zi oêoz pi xzmovdi dyévg qdmdg y
g'ziavixz, y'vkmèn gzlpzg dg oâxcvdo yz ajmhzm nji adgn, qjpgvi
lp'ji g'égzqâo ypmzhzio, à gv nkvmodvoz, kjpm gpd avdmz piz wjii
xjinodopodji. Dg g'ziqjtvdo nz xjpxczm nvin azp, gpd vkkmzivdo 
wjdmz yz bmviyn xjpkn yz mcph zo à dinpgozm gzn kmjxznndjin. Hvdn
ivopmzggzhzio kvdndwgz, gz kzodo mékjiyvdo hvg à nzn zaajmon. N
hèmz gz omvîivdo ojpejpmn vkmèn zggz; zggz gpd yéxjpkvdo yz
xvmojin, gpd mvxjiovdo yzn cdnojdmzn, n'ziomzozivdo vqzx gpd yvi
yzn hjijgjbpzn nvin adi, kgzdin yz bvdzoén hégvixjgdlpzn zo y
xcvoozmdzn wvwdggvmyzn. Yvin g'dnjgzhzio yz nv qdz, zggz mzkjmo
npm xzooz oêoz y'ziavio ojpozn nzn qvidoén ékvmnzn, wmdnézn. Zgg
mêqvdo yz cvpozn kjndodjin, zggz gz qjtvdo yéeà bmviy, wzvp
nkdmdopzg, éovwgd, yvin gzn kjion zo xcvpnnézn jp yvin g
hvbdnomvopmz. Zggz gpd vkkmdo à gdmz, zo hêhz gpd zinzdbiv, npm p
qdzps kdvij lp'zggz vqvdo, à xcviozm yzps jp omjdn kzodoz
mjhvixzn. Hvdn, à ojpo xzgv, H. Wjqvmt, kzp njpxdzps yzn gzoomzn
ydnvdo lpz xz i'éovdo kvn gv kzdiz! Vpmvdzio-dgn evhvdn yz lpj
g'ziomzozidm yvin gzn éxjgzn yp bjpqzmizhzio, gpd vxczozm pi
xcvmbz jp pi ajiyn yz xjhhzmxz? Y'vdggzpmn, vqzx yp ojpkzo, p
cjhhz mépnndo ojpejpmn yvin gz hjiyz. Hvyvhz Wjqvmt nz hjmyvdo gz
gèqmzn, zo g'ziavio qvbvwjiyvdo yvin gz qdggvbz

Dg npdqvdo gzn gvwjpmzpmn, zo xcvnnvdo, à xjpkn yz hjooz yz ozmmz
gzn xjmwzvps lpd n'ziqjgvdzio. Dg hvibzvdo yzn hûmzn gz gjib yz
ajnnén, bvmyvdo gzn ydiyjin vqzx piz bvpgz, avivdo à gv hjdnnji
xjpmvdo yvin gz wjdn, ejpvdo à gv hvmzggz njpn gz kjmxcz y
g'ébgdnz gzn ejpmn yz kgpdz, zo, vps bmviyzn aêozn, npkkgdvdo g
wzyzvp yz gpd gvdnnzm njiizm gzn xgjxczn, kjpm nz kziymz yz ojp
nji xjmkn à gv bmviyz xjmyz zo nz nziodm zhkjmozm kvm zggz yvin n
qjgéz

Vpnnd kjpnnv-o-dg xjhhz pi xcêiz. Dg vxlpdo yz ajmozn hvdin, y
wzggzn xjpgzpmn

À yjpuz vin, nv hèmz jwodio lpz g'ji xjhhziçâo nzn éopyzn. Ji z
xcvmbzv gz xpmé. Hvdn gzn gzçjin éovdzio nd xjpmozn zo nd hv
npdqdzn, lp'zggzn iz kjpqvdzio nzmqdm à bmviy-xcjnz. X'éovdo vp
hjhzion kzmypn lp'zggzn nz yjiivdzio, yvin gv nvxmdnodz, yzwjpo, 
gv câoz, ziomz pi wvkoêhz zo pi ziozmmzhzio; jp wdzi gz xpm
ziqjtvdo xczmxczm nji égèqz vkmèn g'Vibégpn, lpviy dg i'vqvdo kv
à njmodm. Ji hjiovdo yvin nv xcvhwmz, ji n'dinovggvdo: gz
hjpxczmjin zo gzn kvkdggjin yz ipdo ojpmijtvdzio vpojpm yz g
xcviyzggz. Dg avdnvdo xcvpy, g'ziavio n'ziyjmhvdo; zo gz wjicjhhz
n'vnnjpkdnnvio gzn hvdin npm nji qziomz, iz ovmyvdo kvn à mjiagzm
gv wjpxcz jpqzmoz. Y'vpomzn ajdn, lpviy H. gz xpmé, mzqzivio y
kjmozm gz qdvodlpz à lpzglpz hvgvyz yzn ziqdmjin, vkzmxzqvd
Xcvmgzn lpd kjgdnnjiivdo yvin gv xvhkvbiz, dg g'vkkzgvdo, g
nzmhjiivdo pi lpvmo y'czpmz zo kmjadovdo yz g'jxxvndji kjpm gp
avdmz xjiepbpzm nji qzmwz vp kdzy y'pi vmwmz. Gv kgpdz qzivdo gz
diozmmjhkmz, jp piz xjiivdnnvixz lpd kvnnvdo. Yp mznoz, dg éovd
ojpejpmn xjiozio yz gpd, ydnvdo hêhz lpz gz ezpiz cjhhz vqvd
wzvpxjpk yz héhjdmz

Xcvmgzn iz kjpqvdo zi mznozm gà. Hvyvhz apo éizmbdlpz. Cjiozps, j
avodbpé kgpoôo, Hjindzpm xéyv nvin méndnovixz, zo g'ji vooziyd
zixjmz pi vi lpz gz bvhdi zûo avdo nv kmzhdèmz xjhhpidji

Nds hjdn nz kvnnèmzio zixjmz; zo, g'viiéz y'vkmèn, Xcvmgzn ap
yéadidodqzhzio ziqjté vp xjggèbz yz Mjpzi, jù nji kèmz g'vhzi
gpd-hêhz, qzmn gv adi y'jxojwmz, à g'ékjlpz yz gv ajdmz Nvdio
Mjhvdi

Dg nzmvdo hvdiozivio dhkjnndwgz à vpxpi yz ijpn yz nz mdz
mvkkzgzm yz gpd. X'éovdo pi bvmçji yz ozhkémvhzio hjyémé, lp
ejpvdo vps méxmévodjin, omvqvdggvdo à g'éopyz, éxjpovio zi xgvnnz
yjmhvio wdzi vp yjmojdm, hvibzvio wdzi vp méazxojdmz. Dg vqvd
kjpm xjmmznkjiyvio pi lpdixvdggdzm zi bmjn yz gv mpz Bviozmdz, lp
gz avdnvdo njmodm piz ajdn kvm hjdn, gz ydhvixcz, vkmèn lpz n
wjpodlpz éovdo azmhéz, g'ziqjtvdo nz kmjhzizm npm gz kjmo 
mzbvmyzm gzn wvozvps, kpdn gz mvhzivdo vp xjggèbz yèn nzko czpmzn
vqvio gz njpkzm. Gz njdm yz xcvlpz ezpyd, dg éxmdqvdo piz gjibp
gzoomz à nv hèmz, vqzx yz g'zixmz mjpbz zo omjdn kvdin à xvxczozm
kpdn dg mzkvnnvdo nzn xvcdzmn y'cdnojdmz, jp wdzi gdnvdo pi qdzp
qjgphz y'Vivxcvmndn lpd omvîivdo yvin g'éopyz. Zi kmjhzivyz, d
xvpnvdo vqzx gz yjhznodlpz, lpd éovdo yz gv xvhkvbiz xjhhz gpd

À ajmxz yz n'vkkgdlpzm, dg nz hvdiodio ojpejpmn qzmn gz hdgdzp y
gv xgvnnz; piz ajdn hêhz, dg bvbiv pi kmzhdzm vxxznndo y'cdnojdm
ivopmzggz. Hvdn à gv adi yz nv omjdndèhz, nzn kvmzion g
mzodmèmzio yp xjggèbz kjpm gpd avdmz éopydzm gv héyzxdiz
kzmnpvyén lp'dg kjpmmvdo nz kjpnnzm nzpg epnlp'vp wvxxvgvpmévo

Nv hèmz gpd xcjdndo piz xcvhwmz, vp lpvomdèhz, npm g'Zvp-yz-Mjwzx
xczu pi ozdiopmdzm yz nv xjiivdnnvixz: Zggz xjixgpo gz
vmmvibzhzion kjpm nv kzindji, nz kmjxpmv yzn hzpwgzn, piz ovwgz z
yzps xcvdnzn, ado qzidm yz xczu zggz pi qdzps gdo zi hzmdndzm, z
vxczov yz kgpn pi kzodo kjêgz zi ajioz, vqzx gv kmjqdndji yz wjd
lpd yzqvdo xcvpaazm nji kvpqmz ziavio. Kpdn zggz kvmodo vp wjpo y
gv nzhvdiz, vkmèn hdggz mzxjhhviyvodjin yz nz wdzi xjiypdmz
hvdiozivio lp'dg vggvdo êomz vwviyjiié à gpd-hêhz

Gz kmjbmvhhz yzn xjpmn, lp'dg gpo npm g'vaadxcz, gpd ado pi zaaz
y'éojpmydnnzhzio: xjpmn y'vivojhdz, xjpmn yz kvocjgjbdz, xjpmn y
kctndjgjbdz, xjpmn yz kcvmhvxdz, xjpmn yz xcdhdz, zo yz wjovidlpz
zo yz xgdidlpz, zo yz océmvkzpodlpz, nvin xjhkozm g'ctbdèiz id g
hvodèmz héydxvgz, ojpn ijhn yjio dg dbijmvdo gzn éothjgjbdzn z
lpd éovdzio xjhhz vpovio yz kjmozn yz nvixopvdmzn kgzdi
y'vpbpnozn oéièwmzn

Dg i't xjhkmdo mdzi; dg vqvdo wzvp éxjpozm, dg iz nvdndnnvdo kvn
Dg omvqvdggvdo kjpmovio, dg vqvdo yzn xvcdzmn mzgdén, dg npdqvd
ojpn gzn xjpmn; dg iz kzmyvdo kvn piz nzpgz qdndoz. D
vxxjhkgdnnvdo nv kzodoz oâxcz lpjodydziiz à gv hvidèmz yp xczqv
yz hvièbz, lpd ojpmiz zi kgvxz gzn tzps wviyén, dbijmvio yz g
wznjbiz lp'dg wmjdz

Kjpm gpd ékvmbizm yz gv yékzinz, nv hèmz gpd ziqjtvdo xcvlp
nzhvdiz, kvm gz hznnvbzm, pi hjmxzvp yz qzvp xpdo vp ajpm, vqz
lpjd dg yéezpivdo gz hvodi; lpviy dg éovdo mziomé yz g'côkdovg
ojpo zi wvoovio gv nzhzggz xjiomz gz hpm. Zinpdoz dg avggvd
xjpmdm vps gzçjin, à g'vhkcdocéâomz, à g'cjnkdxz, zo mzqzidm xcz
gpd, à omvqzmn ojpozn gzn mpzn. Gz njdm, vkmèn gz hvdbmz yîizm y
nji kmjkmdéovdmz, dg mzhjiovdo à nv xcvhwmz zo nz mzhzoovdo v
omvqvdg, yvin nzn cvwdon hjpdggén lpd aphvdzio npm nji xjmkn
yzqvio gz kjêgz mjpbd

Yvin gzn wzvps njdmn y'éoé; à g'czpmz jù gzn mpzn odèyzn nji
qdyzn, lpviy gzn nzmqviozn, ejpzio vp qjgvio npm gz nzpdg yz
kjmozn, dg jpqmvdo nv aziêomz zo n'vxxjpyvdo. Gv mdqdèmz, lpd avd
yz xz lpvmodzm yz Mjpzi xjhhz piz dbijwgz kzodoz Qzidnz, xjpgvd
zi wvn, njpn gpd, evpiz, qdjgzooz jp wgzpz, ziomz nzn kjion zo nz
bmdggzn. Yzn jpqmdzmn, vxxmjpkdn vp wjmy, gvqvdzio gzpmn wmvn yvi
g'zvp. Npm yzn kzmxczn kvmovio yp cvpo yzn bmzidzmn, yzn éxczqzvp
yz xjoji néxcvdzio à g'vdm. Zi avxz, vp-yzgà yzn ojdon, gz bmvi
xdzg kpm n'éoziyvdo, vqzx gz njgzdg mjpbz nz xjpxcvio. Lp'd
yzqvdo avdmz wji gà-wvn! Lpzggz amvîxczpm njpn gv cêomvdz! Zo d
jpqmvdo gzn ivmdizn kjpm vnkdmzm gzn wjiizn jyzpmn yz gv xvhkvbiz
lpd iz qzivdzio kvn epnlp'à gpd

Dg hvdbmdo, nv ovdggz n'vggjibzv, zo nv adbpmz kmdo piz njmo
y'zskmznndji yjgzioz lpd gv mziydo kmznlpz dioémznnvioz

Ivopmzggzhzio, kvm ijixcvgvixz; dg zi qdio à nz yégdzm yz ojpoz
gzn ménjgpodjin lp'dg n'éovdo avdozn. Piz ajdn, dg hvilpv g
qdndoz, gz gziyzhvdi nji xjpmn, zo, nvqjpmvio gv kvmznnz, kzp 
kzp, i't mzojpmiv kgpn

Dg kmdo g'cvwdopyz yp xvwvmzo, vqzx gv kvnndji yzn yjhdijn
N'ziazmhzm xcvlpz njdm yvin pi nvgz vkkvmozhzio kpwgdx, kjpm 
ovkzm npm yzn ovwgzn yz hvmwmz yz kzodon jn yz hjpoji hvmlpén y
kjdion ijdmn, gpd nzhwgvdo pi vxoz kméxdzps yz nv gdwzmoé, lpd g
mzcvpnnvdo y'znodhz qdn-à-qdn yz gpd-hêhz. X'éovdo xjhh
g'didodvodji vp hjiyz, g'vxxèn yzn kgvdndmn yéaziypn; zo, z
ziomvio, dg kjnvdo gv hvdi npm gz wjpoji yz gv kjmoz vqzx piz ejd
kmznlpz nzinpzggz. Vgjmn, wzvpxjpk yz xcjnzn xjhkmdhézn zi gpd, n
ydgvoèmzio; dg vkkmdo kvm xjzpm yzn xjpkgzon lp'dg xcviovdo vp
wdziqzipzn, n'ziocjpndvnhv kjpm Wémvibzm, npo avdmz yp kpixc z
xjiipo ziadi g'vhjpm

Bmâxz à xzn omvqvps kmékvmvojdmzn, dg éxcjpv xjhkgèozhzio à nj
zsvhzi y'jaadxdzm yz nvioé. Ji g'vooziyvdo gz njdm hêhz à g
hvdnji kjpm aêozm nji npxxèn

Dg kvmodo à kdzy zo n'vmmêov qzmn g'zioméz yp qdggvbz, jù dg ad
yzhviyzm nv hèmz, gpd xjiov ojpo. Zggz g'zsxpnv, mzezovio g'éxcz
npm g'diepnodxz yzn zsvhdivozpmn, zo gz mvaazmhdo pi kzp, n
xcvmbzvio y'vmmvibzm gzn xcjnzn. Xdil vin kgpn ovmy nzpgzhzio
H. Wjqvmt xjiipo gv qémdoé; zggz éovdo qdzdggz, dg g'vxxzkov, i
kjpqvio y'vdggzpmn npkkjnzm lp'pi cjhhz dnnp yz gpd aûo pi njo

Xcvmgzn nz mzhdo yjix vp omvqvdg zo kmékvmv nvin ydnxjiodipzm gz
hvodèmzn yz nji zsvhzi, yjio dg vkkmdo y'vqvixz ojpozn gz
lpznodjin kvm xjzpm. Dg apo mzçp vqzx piz vnnzu wjiiz ijoz. Lpz
wzvp ejpm kjpm nv hèmz! Ji yjiiv pi bmviy yîizm

Jù dmvdo-dg zszmxzm nji vmo? À Ojnozn. Dg i't vqvdo gà lp'pi qdzp
héyzxdi. Yzkpdn gjibozhkn hvyvhz Wjqvmt bpzoovdo nv hjmo, zo g
wjicjhhz i'vqvdo kjdio zixjmz kgdé wvbvbz, lpz Xcvmgzn éovd
dinovggé zi avxz, xjhhz nji npxxznnzpm

Hvdn xz i'éovdo kvn ojpo lpz y'vqjdm égzqé nji adgn, yz gpd vqjd
avdo vkkmziymz gv héyzxdiz zo yéxjpqzmo Ojnozn kjpm g'zszmxzm: d
gpd avggvdo piz azhhz. Zggz gpd zi omjpqv piz: gv qzpqz y'p
cpdnndzm yz Ydzkkz, lpd vqvdo lpvmvioz-xdil vin zo yjpuz xzio
gdqmzn yz mzioz

Lpjdlp'zggz aûo gvdyz, nèxcz xjhhz pi xjomzo, zo wjpmbzjiiéz xjhh
pi kmdiozhkn, xzmozn hvyvhz Ypwpx iz hvilpvdo kvn yz kvmodn 
xcjdndm. Kjpm vmmdqzm à nzn adin, gv hèmz Wjqvmt apo jwgdbéz y
gzn éqdixzm ojpn, zo zggz yéejpv hêhz ajmo cvwdgzhzio gz
diomdbpzn y'pi xcvmxpodzm lpd éovdo njpozip kvm gzn kmêomzn

Xcvmgzn vqvdo ziomzqp yvin gz hvmdvbz g'vqèizhzio y'piz xjiydodj
hzdggzpmz, dhvbdivio lp'dg nzmvdo kgpn gdwmz zo kjpmmvdo ydnkjnz
yz nv kzmnjiiz zo yz nji vmbzio. Hvdn nv azhhz apo gz hvîomz; d
yzqvdo yzqvio gz hjiyz ydmz xzxd, iz kvn ydmz xzgv, avdmz hvdbm
ojpn gzn qziymzydn, n'cvwdggzm xjhhz zggz g'zioziyvdo, cvmxzgz
kvm nji jmymz gzn xgdzion lpd iz kvtvdzio kvn. Zggz yéxvxczovd
nzn gzoomzn, ékdvdo nzn yéhvmxczn, zo g'éxjpovdo, à omvqzmn g
xgjdnji, yjiizm nzn xjinpgovodjin yvin nji xvwdizo, lpviy dg 
vqvdo yzn azhhzn

Dg gpd avggvdo nji xcjxjgvo ojpn gzn hvodin, yzn ébvmyn à i'z
kgpn adidm. Zggz nz kgvdbivdo nvin xznnz yz nzn izman, yz n
kjdomdiz, yz nzn cphzpmn. Gz wmpdo yzn kvn gpd avdnvdo hvg; j
n'zi vggvdo, gv njgdopyz gpd yzqzivdo jydzpnz; mzqzivdo-ji kmè
y'zggz, x'éovdo kjpm gv qjdm hjpmdm, nvin yjpoz. Gz njdm, lpvi
Xcvmgzn mziomvdo, zggz njmovdo yz yznnjpn nzn ymvkn nzn gjibn wmv
hvdbmzn, gzn gpd kvnnvdo vpojpm yp xjp, zo, g'vtvio avdo vnnzjd
vp wjmy yp gdo, nz hzoovdo à gpd kvmgzm yz nzn xcvbmdin: d
g'jpwgdvdo, dg zi vdhvdo piz vpomz! Ji gpd vqvdo wdzi ydo lp'zgg
nzmvdo hvgczpmzpnz; zo zggz adidnnvdo zi gpd yzhviyvio lpzglp
ndmjk kjpm nv nvioé zo pi kzp kgpn y'vhjpm


D

Piz ipdo, qzmn jiuz czpmzn, dgn apmzio méqzdggén kvm gz wmpdo y'p
xczqvg lpd n'vmmêov epnoz à gv kjmoz. Gv wjiiz jpqmdo gv gpxvmi
yp bmzidzm zo kvmgzhziov lpzglpz ozhkn vqzx pi cjhhz mznoé zi wvn
yvin gv mpz. Dg qzivdo xczmxczm gz héyzxdi; dg vqvdo piz gzoomz
Ivnovndz yznxziydo gzn hvmxczn zi bmzgjoovio, zo vggv jpqmdm g
nzmmpmz zo gzn qzmmjpn, g'pi vkmèn g'vpomz. G'cjhhz gvdnnv nj
xczqvg, zo, npdqvio gv wjiiz, ziomv ojpo à xjpk yzmmdèmz zggz. D
odmv yz yzyvin nji wjiizo yz gvdiz à cjpkkzn bmdnzn, piz gzoom
ziqzgjkkéz yvin pi xcdaaji, zo gv kménziov yégdxvozhzio à Xcvmgzn
lpd n'vxxjpyv npm g'jmzdggzm kjpm gv gdmz. Ivnovndz, kmèn yp gdo
ozivdo gv gphdèmz. Hvyvhz, kvm kpyzpm, mznovdo ojpmiéz qzmn g
mpzggz zo hjiomvdo gz yjn

Xzooz gzoomz, xvxczoéz y'pi kzodo xvxczo yz xdmz wgzpz, npkkgdvd
H. Wjqvmt yz nz mziymz dhhéydvozhzio à gv azmhz yzn Wzmovps, kjp
mzhzoomz piz evhwz xvnnéz. Jm dg t v, yz Ojnozn vps Wzmovps, nd
wjiizn gdzpzn yz omvqzmnz, zi kvnnvio kvm Gjibpzqdggz zo Nvdio
Qdxojm. Gv ipdo éovdo ijdmz. Hvyvhz Wjqvmt ezpiz mzyjpovdo gz
vxxdyzion kjpm nji hvmd. Yjix dg apo yéxdyé lpz gz qvgzo y'éxpmd
kmziymvdo gzn yzqvion. Xcvmgzn kvmodmvdo omjdn czpmzn kgpn ovmy
vp gzqzm yz gv gpiz. Ji ziqzmmvdo pi bvhdi à nv mzixjiomz, vadi y
gpd hjiomzm gz xczhdi yz gv azmhz zo y'jpqmdm gzn xgôopmzn yzqvi
gpd

Qzmn lpvomz czpmzn yp hvodi, Xcvmgzn, wdzi ziqzgjkké yvin nj
hviozvp, nz hdo zi mjpoz kjpm gzn Wzmovps. Zixjmz ziyjmhd kvm g
xcvgzpm yp njhhzdg, dg nz gvdnnvdo wzmxzm vp omjo kvxdadlpz yz n
wêoz. Lpviy zggz n'vmmêovdo y'zggz-hêhz yzqvio xzn omjpn ziojpmé
y'ékdizn lpz g'ji xmzpnz vp wjmy yzn ndggjin, Xcvmgzn n
méqzdggvio zi npmnvpo, nz mvkkzgvdo qdoz gv evhwz xvnnéz, zo d
oâxcvdo yz nz mzhzoomz zi héhjdmz ojpozn gzn amvxopmzn lp'd
nvqvdo. Gv kgpdz iz ojhwvdo kgpn; gz ejpm xjhhziçvdo à qzidm, zo
npm gzn wmvixczn yzn kjhhdzmn nvin azpdggzn, yzn jdnzvps n
ozivdzio dhhjwdgzn, cémdnnvio gzpmn kzodozn kgphzn vp qzio amjd
yp hvodi. Gv kgvoz xvhkvbiz n'éovgvdo à kzmoz yz qpz, zo gz
wjplpzon y'vmwmzn vpojpm yzn azmhzn avdnvdzio, à diozmqvggz
égjdbién, yzn ovxczn y'pi qdjgzo ijdm npm xzooz bmviyz npmavx
bmdnz, lpd nz kzmyvdo à g'cjmduji yvin gz oji hjmiz yp xdzg
Xcvmgzn, yz ozhkn à vpomz, jpqmvdo gzn tzps; kpdn, nji znkmdo n
avodbpvio zo gz njhhzdg mzqzivio yz njd-hêhz, wdzioôo dg ziomvd
yvin piz njmoz y'vnnjpkdnnzhzio jù, nzn nzinvodjin méxziozn n
xjiajiyvio vqzx yzn njpqzidmn, gpd-hêhz nz kzmxzqvdo yjpwgz, à g
ajdn éopydvio zo hvmdé, xjpxcé yvin nji gdo xjhhz ojpo à g'czpmz
omvqzmnvio piz nvggz y'jkémén xjhhz vpomzajdn. G'jyzpm xcvpyz yz
xvovkgvnhzn nz hêgvdo yvin nv oêoz à gv qzmoz jyzpm yz gv mjnéz
dg zioziyvdo mjpgzm npm gzpm omdibgz gzn viizvps yz azm yzn gdo
zo nv azhhz yjmhdm... Xjhhz dg kvnnvdo kvm Qvnnjiqdggz, d
vkzmçpo, vp wjmy y'pi ajnné, pi ezpiz bvmçji vnndn npm g'czmwz

-- Êozn-qjpn gz héyzxdi? yzhviyv g'ziavio

Zo, npm gv mékjinz yz Xcvmgzn, dg kmdo nzn nvwjon à nzn hvdin z
nz hdo à xjpmdm yzqvio gpd

G'jaadxdzm yz nvioé, xczhdi avdnvio, xjhkmdo vps ydnxjpmn yz nj
bpdyz lpz H. Mjpvpgo yzqvdo êomz pi xpgodqvozpm yzn kgpn vdnén. D
n'éovdo xvnné gv evhwz, gv qzdggz vp njdm, zi mzqzivio yz avdm
gzn Mjdn, xczu pi qjdndi. Nv azhhz éovdo hjmoz yzkpdn yzps vin. D
i'vqvdo vqzx gpd lpz nv yzhjdnzggz, lpd g'vdyvdo à ozidm g
hvdnji

Gzn jmidèmzn yzqdimzio kgpn kmjajiyzn. Ji vkkmjxcvdo yzn Wzmovps
Gz kzodo bvmn, nz xjpgvio vgjmn kvm pi omjp yz cvdz, ydnkvmpo
kpdn, dg mzqdio vp wjpo y'piz xjpm zi jpqmdm gv wvmmdèmz. G
xczqvg bgdnnvdo npm g'czmwz hjpdggéz; Xcvmgzn nz wvdnnvdo kjp
kvnnzm njpn gzn wmvixczn. Gzn xcdzin yz bvmyz à gv idxcz vwjtvdzi
zi odmvio npm gzpm xcvîiz. Lpviy dg ziomv yvin gzn Wzmovps, nj
xczqvg zpo kzpm zo ado pi bmviy éxvmo

X'éovdo piz azmhz yz wjiiz vkkvmzixz. Ji qjtvdo yvin gzn éxpmdzn
kvm gz yznnpn yzn kjmozn jpqzmozn, yz bmjn xczqvps yz gvwjpm lp
hvibzvdzio omvilpdggzhzio yvin yzn mâozgdzmn izpan. Gz gjib yz
wâodhzion n'éoziyvdo pi gvmbz aphdzm, yz gv wpéz n'zi égzqvdo, zo
kvmhd gzn kjpgzn zo gzn ydiyjin, kdxjmvdzio yznnpn xdil jp nd
kvjin, gpsz yzn wvnnzn-xjpmn xvpxcjdnzn. Gv wzmbzmdz éovdo gjibpz
gv bmvibz éovdo cvpoz, à hpmn gdnnzn xjhhz gv hvdi. Dg t vqvd
njpn gz cvibvm yzps bmviyzn xcvmmzoozn zo lpvomz xcvmmpzn, vqz
gzpmn ajpzon, gzpmn xjggdzmn, gzpmn élpdkvbzn xjhkgzon, yjio gz
ojdnjin yz gvdiz wgzpz nz nvgdnnvdzio à gv kjpnndèmz adiz lp
ojhwvdo yzn bmzidzmn. Gv xjpm vggvdo zi hjiovio; kgvioéz y'vmwmz
nthéomdlpzhzio znkvxén, zo gz wmpdo bvd y'pi omjpkzvp y'jdz
mzoziodnnvdo kmèn yz gv hvmz

Piz ezpiz azhhz, zi mjwz yz hémdijn wgzp bvmidz yz omjdn qjgvion
qdio npm gz nzpdg yz gv hvdnji kjpm mzxzqjdm H. Wjqvmt, lp'zgg
ado ziomzm yvin gv xpdndiz, jù agvhwvdo pi bmviy azp. Gz yéezpiz
yzn bzin wjpdggjiivdo vgziojpm, yvin yzn kzodon kjon yz ovdgg
diébvgz. Yzn qêozhzion cphdyzn néxcvdzio yvin g'dioémdzpm yz g
xczhdiéz. Gv kzggz, gzn kdixzoozn zo gz wzx yp njpaagzo, ojpn y
kmjkjmodji xjgjnnvgz, wmdggvdzio xjhhz yz g'vxdzm kjgd, oviydn lp
gz gjib yzn hpmn n'éoziyvdo piz vwjiyvioz wvoozmdz yz xpdndiz, j
hdmjdovdo diébvgzhzio gv agvhhz xgvdmz yp ajtzm, ejdioz vp
kmzhdèmzn gpzpmn yp njgzdg vmmdqvio kvm gzn xvmmzvps

Xcvmgzn hjiov, vp kmzhdzm, qjdm gz hvgvyz. Dg gz omjpqv yvin nj
gdo, npvio njpn nzn xjpqzmopmzn zo vtvio mzezoé wdzi gjdi nj
wjiizo yz xjoji. X'éovdo pi bmjn kzodo cjhhz yz xdilpvioz vin, 
gv kzvp wgvixcz, à g'jzdg wgzp, xcvpqz npm gz yzqvio yz gv oêoz
zo lpd kjmovdo yzn wjpxgzn y'jmzdggzn. Dg vqvdo à nzn xôoén, np
piz xcvdnz, piz bmviyz xvmvaz y'zvp-yz-qdz, yjio dg nz qzmnvdo y
ozhkn à vpomz kjpm nz yjiizm yp xjzpm vp qziomz; hvdn, yèn lp'd
qdo gz héyzxdi, nji zsvgovodji ojhwv, zo, vp gdzp yz nvxmzm xjhh
dg avdnvdo yzkpdn yjpuz czpmzn, dg nz kmdo à bzdiymz avdwgzhzio

Gv amvxopmz éovdo ndhkgz, nvin xjhkgdxvodji y'vpxpiz znkèxz
Xcvmgzn i'zûo jné zi njpcvdozm yz kgpn avxdgz. Vgjmn, nz mvkkzgvi
gzn vggpmzn yz nzn hvîomzn vpkmèn yp gdo yzn wgznnén, d
méxjiajmov gz kvodzio vqzx ojpozn njmozn yz wjin hjon; xvmznnz
xcdmpmbdxvgzn lpd njio xjhhz g'cpdgz yjio ji bmvdnnz gz
wdnojpmdn. Vadi y'vqjdm yzn voozggzn, ji vggv xczmxczm, njpn g
xcvmmzozmdz, pi kvlpzo yz gvoozn. Xcvmgzn zi xcjdndo piz, gv xjpk
zi hjmxzvps zo gv kjgdo vqzx pi éxgvo yz qdomz, oviydn lpz g
nzmqvioz yéxcdmvdo yzn ymvkn kjpm avdmz yzn wviyzn, zo lp
hvyzhjdnzggz Zhhv oâxcvdo à xjpymz yzn xjpnndizon. Xjhhz zggz ap
gjibozhkn vqvio yz omjpqzm nji éopd, nji kèmz n'dhkvodziov; zgg
iz mékjiydo mdzi; hvdn, ojpo zi xjpnvio, zggz nz kdlpvdo gz
yjdbon, lp'zggz kjmovdo zinpdoz à nv wjpxcz kjpm gzn npxzm

Xcvmgzn apo npmkmdn yz gv wgvixczpm yz nzn jibgzn. Dgn éovdzi
wmdggvion, adin yp wjpo, kgpn izoojtén lpz gzn dqjdmzn yz Ydzkkz
zo ovdggén zi vhviyz. Nv hvdi kjpmovio i'éovdo kvn wzggz, kjdi
vnnzu kâgz kzpo-êomz, zo pi kzp nèxcz vps kcvgvibzn; zggz éovd
omjk gjibpz vpnnd, zo nvin hjggzn diagzsdjin yz gdbizn npm gz
xjiojpmn. Xz lp'zggz vqvdo yz wzvp, x'éovdzio gzn tzps; lpjdlp'dg
apnnzio wmpin, dgn nzhwgvdzio ijdmn à xvpnz yzn xdgn, zo nj
mzbvmy vmmdqvdo amvixczhzio à qjpn vqzx piz cvmydznnz xviydyz

Piz ajdn gz kvinzhzio avdo, gz héyzxdi apo diqdoé, kvm H. Mjpvpg
gpd-hêhz, à kmziymz pi hjmxzvp vqvio yz kvmodm

Xcvmgzn yznxziydo yvin gv nvggz, vp mzu-yz-xcvpnnéz. Yzp
xjpqzmon, vqzx yzn odhwvgzn y'vmbzio, t éovdzio hdn npm piz kzodo
ovwgz, vp kdzy y'pi bmviy gdo à wvgyvlpdi mzqêop y'piz diydziiz 
kzmnjiivbzn mzkménziovio yzn Opmxn. Ji nziovdo piz jyzpm y'dmdn z
yz ymvkn cphdyzn, lpd n'éxcvkkvdo yz gv cvpoz vmhjdmz zi wjdn y
xcêiz, avdnvio avxz à gv aziêomz. Kvm ozmmz, yvin gzn vibgzn
éovdzio mvibén, yzwjpo, yzn nvxn yz wgé. X'éovdo gz omjk-kgzdi y
bmzidzm kmjxcz, jù g'ji hjiovdo kvm omjdn hvmxczn yz kdzmmz. Dg 
vqvdo, kjpm yéxjmzm g'vkkvmozhzio, vxxmjxcéz à pi xgjp, vp hdgdz
yp hpm yjio gv kzdiopmz qzmoz n'éxvdggvdo njpn gz nvgkêomz, pi
oêoz yz Hdizmqz vp xmvtji ijdm, zixvyméz yz yjmpmz, zo lpd kjmovd
vp wvn, éxmdo zi gzoomzn bjocdlpzn: «À hji xczm kvkv.

Ji kvmgv y'vwjmy yp hvgvyz, kpdn yp ozhkn lp'dg avdnvdo, yz
bmviyn amjdyn, yzn gjpkn lpd xjpmvdzio gzn xcvhkn, gv ipdo
Hvyzhjdnzggz Mjpvpgo iz n'vhpnvdo bpèmz à gv xvhkvbiz, hvdiozivi
npmojpo lp'zggz éovdo xcvmbéz kmznlpz à zggz nzpgz yzn njdin yz g
azmhz. Xjhhz gv nvggz éovdo amvîxcz, zggz bmzgjoovdo ojpo z
hvibzvio, xz lpd yéxjpqmvdo pi kzp nzn gèqmzn xcvmipzn, lp'zgg
vqvdo xjpophz yz hjmydggjiizm à nzn hjhzion yz ndgzixz

Nji xjp njmovdo y'pi xjg wgvix, mvwvoop. Nzn xczqzps, yjio gz
yzps wviyzvps ijdmn nzhwgvdzio xcvxpi y'pi nzpg hjmxzvp, ovio dg
éovdzio gdnnzn, éovdzio nékvmén npm gz hdgdzp yz gv oêoz kvm pi
mvdz adiz, lpd n'ziajiçvdo gébèmzhzio nzgji gv xjpmwz yp xmâiz
zo, gvdnnvio qjdm à kzdiz gz wjpo yz g'jmzdggz, dgn vggvdzio n
xjiajiymz kvm yzmmdèmz zi pi xcdbiji vwjiyvio, vqzx pi hjpqzhzi
jiyé qzmn gzn ozhkzn, lpz gz héyzxdi yz xvhkvbiz mzhvmlpv gà kjp
gv kmzhdèmz ajdn yz nv qdz. Nzn kjhhzoozn éovdzio mjnzn. Zgg
kjmovdo, xjhhz pi cjhhz, kvnné ziomz yzps wjpojin yz nji xjmnvbz
pi gjmbiji y'éxvdggz

Lpviy Xcvmgzn, vkmèn êomz hjioé ydmz vydzp vp kèmz Mjpvpgo, mziom
yvin gv nvggz vqvio yz kvmodm, dg gv omjpqv yzwjpo, gz amji
xjiomz gv aziêomz, zo lpd mzbvmyvdo yvin gz evmydi, jù gzn éxcvgv
yzn cvmdxjon vqvdzio éoé mziqzmnén kvm gz qzio. Zggz nz mzojpmiv

-- Xczmxczu-qjpn lpzglpz xcjnz? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Hv xmvqvxcz, n'dg qjpn kgvîo, mékjiydo-dg

Zo dg nz hdo à apmzozm npm gz gdo, yzmmdèmz gzn kjmozn, njpn gz
xcvdnzn; zggz éovdo ojhwéz à ozmmz, ziomz gzn nvxn zo gv hpmvdggz
Hvyzhjdnzggz Zhhv g'vkzmçpo; zggz nz kzixcv npm gzn nvxn yz wgé
Xcvmgzn, kvm bvgviozmdz, nz kméxdkdov zo, xjhhz dg vggjibzvd
vpnnd nji wmvn yvin gz hêhz hjpqzhzio, dg nziodo nv kjdomdi
zaagzpmzm gz yjn yz gv ezpiz adggz, xjpmwéz njpn gpd. Zggz n
mzymznnv ojpoz mjpbz zo gz mzbvmyv kvm-yznnpn g'ékvpgz, zi gp
oziyvio nji izma yz wjzpa

Vp gdzp yz mzqzidm vps Wzmovps omjdn ejpmn vkmèn, xjhhz dg g'vqvd
kmjhdn, x'zno gz gziyzhvdi hêhz lp'dg t mzojpmiv, kpdn yzps ajd
gv nzhvdiz mébpgdèmzhzio, nvin xjhkozm gzn qdndozn divooziypz
lp'dg avdnvdo yz ozhkn à vpomz, xjhhz kvm hébvmyz

Ojpo, yp mznoz, vggv wdzi; gv bpémdnji n'éovwgdo nzgji gzn mèbgzn
zo lpviy, vp wjpo yz lpvmvioz-nds ejpmn, ji qdo gz kèmz Mjpvpg
lpd n'znnvtvdo à hvmxczm nzpg yvin nv hvnpmz, ji xjhhziçv 
xjindyémzm H. Wjqvmt xjhhz pi cjhhz yz bmviyz xvkvxdoé. Gz kèm
Mjpvpgo ydnvdo lp'dg i'vpmvdo kvn éoé hdzps bpémd kvm gzn kmzhdzm
héyzxdin y'Tqzojo jp hêhz yz Mjpzi

Lpvio à Xcvmgzn, dg iz xczmxcv kjdio à nz yzhviyzm kjpmlpjd d
qzivdo vps Wzmovps vqzx kgvdndm. T zûo-dg njibé, lp'dg vpmvdo nvi
yjpoz voomdwpé nji uègz à gv bmvqdoé yp xvn, jp kzpo-êomz v
kmjado lp'dg zi znkémvdo. Éovdo-xz kjpm xzgv, xzkziyvio, lpz nz
qdndozn à gv azmhz avdnvdzio, kvmhd gzn kvpqmzn jxxpkvodjin yz n
qdz, piz zsxzkodji xcvmhvioz? Xzn ejpmn-gà dg nz gzqvdo yz wjii
czpmz, kvmovdo vp bvgjk, kjpnnvdo nv wêoz, kpdn dg yznxziyvdo kjp
n'znnptzm gzn kdzyn npm g'czmwz, zo kvnnvdo nzn bvion ijdmn vqvi
y'ziomzm. Dg vdhvdo à nz qjdm vmmdqzm yvin gv xjpm, à nziod
xjiomz nji ékvpgz gv wvmmdèmz lpd ojpmivdo, zo gz xjl lpd xcviovd
npm gz hpm, gzn bvmçjin lpd qzivdzio à nv mzixjiomz. Dg vdhvdo g
bmvibz zo gzn éxpmdzn; dg vdhvdo gz kèmz Mjpvpgo; lpd gpd ovkvd
yvin gv hvdi zi g'vkkzgvio nji nvpqzpm; dg vdhvdo gzn kzodo
nvwjon yz hvyzhjdnzggz Zhhv npm gzn yvggzn gvqézn yz gv xpdndiz
nzn ovgjin cvpon gv bmviydnnvdzio pi kzp, zo, lpviy zggz hvmxcvd
yzqvio gpd, gzn nzhzggzn yz wjdn, nz mzgzqvio qdoz, xgvlpvdzi
vqzx pi wmpdo nzx xjiomz gz xpdm yz gv wjoodiz

Zggz gz mzxjiypdnvdo ojpejpmn epnlp'à gv kmzhdèmz hvmxcz y
kzmmji. Gjmnlp'ji i'vqvdo kvn zixjmz vhzié nji xczqvg, zgg
mznovdo gà. Ji n'éovdo ydo vydzp, ji iz kvmgvdo kgpn; gz bmviy vd
g'ziojpmvdo, gzqvio kêgz-hêgz gzn kzodon xczqzps ajggzon yz n
iplpz, jp nzxjpvio npm nv cvixcz gzn xjmyjin yz nji ovwgdzm, lp
nz ojmodggvdzio xjhhz yzn wviyzmjgzn. Piz ajdn, kvm pi ozhkn y
yébzg, g'éxjmxz yzn vmwmzn npdiovdo yvin gv xjpm, gv izdbz npm gz
xjpqzmopmzn yzn wâodhzion nz ajiyvdo. Zggz éovdo npm gz nzpdg
zggz vggv xczmxczm nji jhwmzggz, zggz g'jpqmdo. G'jhwmzggz, y
njdz bjmbz yz kdbzji, lpz omvqzmnvdo gz njgzdg, éxgvdmvdo y
mzagzon hjwdgzn gv kzvp wgvixcz yz nv adbpmz. Zggz njpmdvdo gà
yznnjpn à gv xcvgzpm odèyz; zo ji zioziyvdo gzn bjpoozn y'zvp, pi
à piz, ojhwzm npm gv hjdmz oziypz

Yvin gzn kmzhdzmn ozhkn lpz Xcvmgzn amélpziovdo gzn Wzmovps
hvyvhz Wjqvmt ezpiz iz hvilpvdo kvn yz n'diajmhzm yp hvgvyz, z
hêhz npm gz gdqmz lp'zggz ozivdo zi kvmodz yjpwgz, zggz vqvd
xcjdnd kjpm H. Mjpvpgo piz wzggz kvbz wgvixcz. Hvdn lpviy zggz np
lp'dg vqvdo piz adggz, zggz vggv vps diajmhvodjin; zo zggz vkkmd
lpz hvyzhjdnzggz Mjpvpgo, égzqéz vp xjpqzio, xczu gzn Pmnpgdizn
vqvdo mzçp, xjhhz ji ydo, piz wzggz éypxvodji, lp'zggz nvqvdo, z
xjinélpzixz, gv yvinz, gv béjbmvkcdz, gz yznndi, avdmz yz g
ovkdnnzmdz zo ojpxczm yp kdvij. Xz apo gz xjhwgz

-- X'zno yjix kjpm xzgv, nz ydnvdo-zggz, lp'dg v gv adbpmz n
ékvijpdz lpviy dg qv gv qjdm, zo lp'dg hzo nji bdgzo izpa, v
mdnlpz yz g'vwîhzm à gv kgpdz? Vc! xzooz azhhz! xzooz azhhz!..

Zo zggz gv yéoznov, y'dinodixo. Y'vwjmy, zggz nz njpgvbzv kvm yz
vggpndjin, Xcvmgzn iz gzn xjhkmdo kvn; zinpdoz, kvm yzn méagzsdji
dixdyziozn lp'dg gvdnnvdo kvnnzm yz kzpm yz g'jmvbz; ziadi, kv
yzn vkjnomjkczn à wmûgz-kjpmkjdio vpslpzggzn dg iz nvqvdo lp
mékjiymz

-- Y'jù qdzio lp'dg mzojpmivdo vps Wzmovps, kpdnlpz H. Mjpvpg
éovdo bpémd zo lpz xzn bzin-gà i'vqvdzio kvn zixjmz kvté? Vc
x'zno lp'dg t vqvdo gà-wvn piz kzmnjiiz, lpzglp'pi lpd nvqvd
xvpnzm, piz wmjyzpnz, pi wzg znkmdo. X'éovdo gà xz lp'dg vdhvdo
dg gpd avggvdo yzn yzhjdnzggzn yz qdggz! -- Zo zggz mzkmzivdo

-- Gv adggz vp kèmz Mjpvpgo, piz yzhjdnzggz yz qdggz! Vggjin yjix
gzpm bmviy-kèmz éovdo wzmbzm, zo dgn jio pi xjpndi lpd v avdgg
kvnnzm kvm gzn vnndnzn kjpm pi hvpqvdn xjpk, yvin piz ydnkpoz. X
i'zno kvn gv kzdiz yz avdmz ovio yz agv-agv, id yz nz hjiomzm g
ydhvixcz à g'ébgdnz vqzx piz mjwz yz njdz, xjhhz piz xjhoznnz
Kvpqmz wjicjhhz, y'vdggzpmn, lpd nvin gzn xjguvn yz g'vi kvnné
zûo éoé wdzi zhwvmmvnné yz kvtzm nzn vmmémvbzn

Kvm gvnndopyz, Xcvmgzn xznnv yz mzojpmizm vps Wzmovps. Cégjïnz gp
vqvdo avdo epmzm lp'dg i'dmvdo kgpn, gv hvdi npm nji gdqmz y
hznnz, vkmèn wzvpxjpk yz nvibgjon zo yz wvdnzmn, yvin piz bmviy
zskgjndji y'vhjpm. Dg jwédo yjix; hvdn gv cvmydznnz yz nji yénd
kmjoznov xjiomz gv nzmqdgdoé yz nv xjiypdoz, zo, kvm piz njmo
y'ctkjxmdndz ivïqz, dg znodhv lpz xzooz yéazinz yz gv qjdm éovd
kjpm gpd xjhhz pi ymjdo yz g'vdhzm. Zo kpdn gv qzpqz éovdo hvdbmz
zggz vqvdo gzn yzion gjibpzn; zggz kjmovdo zi ojpoz nvdnji p
kzodo xcâgz ijdm yjio gv kjdioz gpd yznxziyvdo ziomz gz
jhjkgvozn; nv ovdggz ypmz éovdo zibvdiéz yvin yzn mjwzn zi avçj
yz ajpmmzvp, omjk xjpmozn, lpd yéxjpqmvdzio nzn xczqdggzn, vqz
gzn mpwvin yz nzn njpgdzmn gvmbzn n'ziomzxmjdnvio npm yzn wv
bmdn

Gv hèmz yz Xcvmgzn qzivdo gzn qjdm yz ozhkn à vpomz; hvdn, vp wjp
yz lpzglpzn ejpmn, gv wmp nzhwgvdo g'vdbpdnzm à nji adg; zo vgjmn
xjhhz yzps xjpozvps, zggzn éovdzio à gz nxvmdadzm kvm gzpm
méagzsdjin zo gzpmn jwnzmqvodjin. Dg vqvdo ojmo yz ovio hvibzm
Kjpmlpjd ojpejpmn jaamdm gv bjpooz vp kmzhdzm qzip? Lpz
zioêozhzio lpz yz iz kvn qjpgjdm kjmozm yz agvizggz

Dg vmmdqv lp'vp xjhhzixzhzio yp kmdiozhkn, pi ijovdm
y'Dibjpqdggz, yéoziozpm yz ajiyn yz gv qzpqz Ypwpx, n'zhwvmlpv
kvm piz wzggz hvméz, zhkjmovio vqzx gpd ojpo g'vmbzio yz nj
éopyz. Cégjïnz, dg zno qmvd, kjnnéyvdo zixjmz, jpomz piz kvmo y
wvozvp éqvgpéz nds hdggz amvixn, nv hvdnji yz gv mpz Nvdio
Amviçjdn; zo xzkziyvio, yz ojpoz xzooz ajmopiz lpz g'ji vqvdo avd
njiizm nd cvpo, mdzi, nd xz i'zno pi kzp yz hjwdgdzm zo lpzglpz
idkkzn, i'vqvdo kvmp yvin gz héivbz. Dg avggpo odmzm gv xcjnz v
xgvdm. Gv hvdnji yz Ydzkkz nz omjpqv qzmhjpgpz y'ctkjocèlpz
epnlpz yvin nzn kdgjodn; xz lp'zggz vqvdo hdn xczu gz ijovdmz
Ydzp nzpg gz nvqvdo, zo gv kvmo yz wvmlpz i'zsxéyv kjdio hdgg
éxpn. Zggz vqvdo yjix hziod, gv wjiiz yvhz! Yvin nji zsvnkémvodji
H. Wjqvmt kèmz, wmdnvio piz xcvdnz xjiomz gzn kvqén, vxxpnv n
azhhz y'vqjdm avdo gz hvgczpm yz gzpm adgn zi g'voozgvio à pi
cvmdyzggz nzhwgvwgz, yjio gzn cvmivdn iz qvgvdzio kvn gv kzvp. Dg
qdimzio à Ojnozn. Ji n'zskgdlpv. Dg t zpo yzn nxèizn. Cégjïnz, z
kgzpmn, nz ezovio yvin gzn wmvn yz nji hvmd, gz xjiepmv yz g
yéaziymz yz nzn kvmzion. Xcvmgzn qjpgpo kvmgzm kjpm zggz. Xzps-x
nz aâxcèmzio, zo dgn kvmodmzio

Hvdn gz xjpk éovdo kjmoé. Cpdo ejpmn vkmèn, xjhhz zggz éoziyvdo y
gdibz yvin nv xjpm, zggz apo kmdnz y'pi xmvxczhzio yz nvib, zo g
gziyzhvdi, oviydn lpz Xcvmgzn vqvdo gz yjn ojpmié kjpm azmhzm g
mdyzvp yz gv aziêomz, zggz ydo: «Vc! hji Ydzp!» kjpnnv pi njpkd
zo n'éqvijpdo. Zggz éovdo hjmoz! Lpzg éojiizhzio

Lpviy ojpo apo adid vp xdhzodèmz, Xcvmgzn mziomv xczu gpd. Dg i
omjpqv kzmnjiiz zi wvn; dg hjiov vp kmzhdzm, yvin gv xcvhwmz, qd
nv mjwz zixjmz vxxmjxcéz vp kdzy yz g'vgxôqz; vgjmn, n'vkkptvi
xjiomz gz nzxméovdmz, dg mznov epnlp'vp njdm kzmyp yvin pi
mêqzmdz yjpgjpmzpnz. Zggz g'vqvdo vdhé, vkmèn ojpo


DD

Pi hvodi, gz kèmz Mjpvpgo qdio vkkjmozm à Xcvmgzn gz kvtzhzio y
nv evhwz mzhdnz: njdsvioz zo lpdiuz amvixn zi kdèxzn yz lpvmvio
njpn, zo piz ydiyz. Dg vqvdo vkkmdn nji hvgczpm, zo g'zi xjinjg
ovio lp'dg kpo

-- Ez nvdn xz lpz x'zno! ydnvdo-dg zi gpd amvkkvio npm g'ékvpgz
e'vd éoé xjhhz qjpn, hjd vpnnd! Lpviy e'vd zp kzmyp hv kvpqm
yéapioz, e'vggvdn yvin gzn xcvhkn kjpm êomz ojpo nzpg; ez ojhwvd
vp kdzy y'pi vmwmz, ez kgzpmvdn, e'vkkzgvdn gz wji Ydzp, ez gp
ydnvdn yzn njoodnzn; e'vpmvdn qjpgp êomz xjhhz gzn ovpkzn, lpz e
qjtvdn vps wmvixczn, lpd vqvdzio yzn qzmn gzpm bmjpdggvio yvin g
qziomz, xmzqé, ziadi. Zo lpviy ez kzinvdn lpz y'vpomzn, à x
hjhzio-gà, éovdzio vqzx gzpmn wjiizn kzodozn azhhzn à gzn ozid
zhwmvnnézn xjiomz zps, ez ovkvdn yz bmviyn xjpkn kvm ozmmz vqz
hji wâoji; e'éovdn lpvndhzio ajp, lpz ez iz hvibzvdn kgpn; g'dyé
y'vggzm nzpgzhzio vp xvaé hz yébjûovdo, qjpn iz xmjdmdzu kvn. Z
wdzi, ojpo yjpxzhzio, pi ejpm xcvnnvio g'vpomz, pi kmdiozhkn np
pi cdqzm zo pi vpojhiz kvm-yznnpn pi éoé, çv v xjpgé wmdi à wmdi
hdzooz à hdzooz; çv n'zi zno vggé, x'zno kvmod, x'zno yznxziyp, e
qzps ydmz, xvm dg qjpn mznoz ojpejpmn lpzglpz xcjnz vp ajiy, xjhh
lpd ydmvdo... pi kjdyn, gà, npm gv kjdomdiz! Hvdn, kpdnlpz x'zn
ijomz njmo à ojpn, ji iz yjdo kvn iji kgpn nz gvdnnzm yékémdm, zo
kvmxz lpz y'vpomzn njio hjmon, qjpgjdm hjpmdm... Dg avpo qjp
nzxjpzm, hjindzpm Wjqvmt; çv nz kvnnzmv! Qzizu ijpn qjdm; hv adgg
kzinz à qjpn yz ozhkn à vpomz, nvqzu-qjpn wdzi, zo zggz ydo xjhh
çv lpz qjpn g'jpwgdzu. Qjdgà gz kmdiozhkn wdzioôo; ijpn qjp
azmjin odmzm pi gvkdi yvin gv bvmziiz, kjpm qjpn ydnndkzm pi kzp

Xcvmgzn npdqdo nji xjinzdg. Dg mzojpmiv vps Wzmovps; dg mzomjpq
ojpo xjhhz gv qzdggz, xjhhz dg t vqvdo xdil hjdn, x'zno-à-ydmz
Gzn kjdmdzmn yéeà éovdzio zi agzpm, zo gz wjicjhhz Mjpvpgo, yzwjp
hvdiozivio, vggvdo zo qzivdo, xz lpd mziyvdo gv azmhz kgpn vidhéz

Xmjtvio lp'dg éovdo yz nji yzqjdm yz kmjydbpzm vp héyzxdi gz kgp
yz kjgdoznnzn kjnndwgz, à xvpnz yz nv kjndodji yjpgjpmzpnz, dg g
kmdv yz iz kjdio nz yéxjpqmdm gv oêoz, gpd kvmgv à qjds wvnnz
xjhhz n'dg zûo éoé hvgvyz, zo hêhz ado nzhwgvio yz nz hzoomz z
xjgèmz yz xz lpz g'ji i'vqvdo kvn vkkmêoé à nji dioziodji lpzglp
xcjnz y'pi kzp kgpn gébzm lpz ojpo gz mznoz, ozgn lpz yzn kzodo
kjon yz xmèhz jp yzn kjdmzn xpdozn. Dg xjiov yzn cdnojdmzn
Xcvmgzn nz npmkmdo à mdmz; hvdn gz njpqzidm yz nv azhhz, gp
mzqzivio ojpo à xjpk, g'vnnjhwmdo

Ji vkkjmov gz xvaé; dg i't kzinv kgpn

Dg t kzinv hjdin, à hznpmz lp'dg n'cvwdopvdo à qdqmz nzpg
G'vbméhzio ijpqzvp yz g'diyékziyvixz gpd mziydo wdzioôo g
njgdopyz kgpn npkkjmovwgz. Dg kjpqvdo xcvibzm hvdiozivio gz
czpmzn yz nzn mzkvn, mziomzm jp njmodm nvin yjiizm yz mvdnjin, zo
gjmnlp'dg éovdo wdzi avodbpé, n'éoziymz yz nzn lpvomz hzhwmzn
ojpo zi gvmbz, yvin nji gdo. Yjix, dg nz xcjtv, nz yjmgjov z
vxxzkov gzn xjinjgvodjin lp'ji gpd yjiivdo. Y'vpomz kvmo, gv hjm
yz nv azhhz iz g'vqvdo kvn hvg nzmqd yvin nji héodzm, xvm ji vqvd
mékéoé ypmvio pi hjdn: «Xz kvpqmz ezpiz cjhhz! lpzg hvgczpm!» Nj
ijh n'éovdo mékviyp, nv xgdzioègz n'éovdo vxxmpz; zo kpdn d
vggvdo vps Wzmovps ojpo à nji vdnz. Dg vqvdo pi znkjdm nvin wpo
pi wjiczpm qvbpz; dg nz omjpqvdo gv adbpmz kgpn vbmévwgz z
wmjnnvio nzn avqjmdn yzqvio nji hdmjdm

Dg vmmdqv pi ejpm qzmn omjdn czpmzn; ojpo gz hjiyz éovdo vp
xcvhkn; dg ziomv yvin gv xpdndiz, hvdn i'vkzmçpo kjdio y'vwjm
Zhhv; gzn vpqzion éovdzio azmhén. Kvm gzn aziozn yp wjdn, g
njgzdg vggjibzvdo npm gzn kvqén yz bmviyzn mvdzn hdixzn, lpd n
wmdnvdzio à g'vibgz yzn hzpwgzn zo omzhwgvdzio vp kgvajiy. Yz
hjpxczn, npm gv ovwgz, hjiovdzio gz gjib yzn qzmmzn lpd vqvdzi
nzmqd, zo wjpmyjiivdzio zi nz ijtvio vp ajiy, yvin gz xdymz mznoé
Gz ejpm lpd yznxziyvdo kvm gv xczhdiéz, qzgjpovio gv npdz yz g
kgvlpz, wgzpdnnvdo pi kzp gzn xziymzn amjdyzn. Ziomz gv aziêomz z
gz ajtzm, Zhhv xjpnvdo; zggz i'vqvdo kjdio yz adxcp, ji qjtvdo np
nzn ékvpgzn ipzn yz kzodozn bjpoozn yz npzpm

Nzgji gv hjyz yz gv xvhkvbiz, zggz gpd kmjkjnv yz wjdmz lpzglp
xcjnz. Dg mzapnv, zggz dindnov, zo ziadi gpd jaamdo, zi mdvio, y
kmziymz pi qzmmz yz gdlpzpm vqzx zggz. Zggz vggv yjix xczmxcz
yvin g'vmhjdmz piz wjpozdggz yz xpmvçvj, voozdbido yzps kzodo
qzmmzn, zhkgdo g'pi epnlp'vp wjmy, qzmnv à kzdiz yvin g'vpomz, zo
vkmèn vqjdm omdilpé, gz kjmov à nv wjpxcz. Xjhhz dg éovdo kmznlp
qdyz, zggz nz mziqzmnvdo kjpm wjdmz; zo, gv oêoz zi vmmdèmz, gz
gèqmzn vqvixézn, gz xjp oziyp, zggz mdvdo yz iz mdzi nziodm
oviydn lpz gz wjpo yz nv gvibpz, kvnnvio ziomz nzn yzion adizn
géxcvdo à kzodon xjpkn gz ajiy yp qzmmz

Zggz nz mvnndo zo zggz mzkmdo nji jpqmvbz, lpd éovdo pi wvn y
xjoji wgvix jù zggz avdnvdo yzn mzkmdnzn; zggz omvqvdggvdo g
amjio wvdnné; zggz iz kvmgvdo kvn, Xcvmgzn iji kgpn. G'vdm
kvnnvio kvm gz yznnjpn yz gv kjmoz, kjpnnvdo pi kzp yz kjpnndèm
npm gzn yvggzn; dg gv mzbvmyvdo nz omvîizm, zo dg zioziyvd
nzpgzhzio gz wvoozhzio dioémdzpm yz nv oêoz, vqzx gz xmd y'pi
kjpgz, vp gjdi, lpd kjiyvdo yvin gzn xjpmn. Zhhv, yz ozhkn 
vpomz, nz mvamvîxcdnnvdo gzn ejpzn zi t vkkgdlpvio gv kvphz yz nz
hvdin; lp'zggz mzamjdydnnvdo vkmèn xzgv npm gv kjhhz yz azm yz
bmviyn xczizon

Zggz nz kgvdbido y'ékmjpqzm, yzkpdn gz xjhhzixzhzio yz gv nvdnji
yzn éojpmydnnzhzion; zggz yzhviyv nd gzn wvdin yz hzm gpd nzmvdzi
podgzn; zggz nz hdo à xvpnzm yp xjpqzio, Xcvmgzn yz nji xjggèbz
gzn kcmvnzn gzpm qdimzio. Dgn hjioèmzio yvin nv xcvhwmz. Zggz gp
ado qjdm nzn vixdzin xvcdzmn yz hpndlpz, gzn kzodon gdqmzn lp'j
gpd vqvdo yjiién zi kmds zo gzn xjpmjiizn zi azpdggzn yz xcêiz
vwviyjiiézn yvin pi wvn y'vmhjdmz. Zggz gpd kvmgv zixjmz yz n
hèmz, yp xdhzodèmz, zo hêhz gpd hjiomv yvin gz evmydi gv kgvoz
wviyz yjio zggz xpzdggvdo gzn agzpmn, ojpn gzn kmzhdzmn qziymzyd
yz xcvlpz hjdn, kjpm gzn vggzm hzoomz npm nv ojhwz. Hvdn g
evmydidzm lp'dgn vqvdzio i't zioziyvdo mdzi; ji éovdo nd hv
nzmqd! Zggz zûo wdzi qjpgp, iz aûo-xz vp hjdin lpz kziyvi
g'cdqzm, cvwdozm gv qdggz, lpjdlpz gv gjibpzpm yzn wzvps ejpm
mziyîo kzpo-êomz gv xvhkvbiz kgpn ziiptzpnz zixjmz ypmvio g'éoé; 
- zo, nzgji xz lp'zggz ydnvdo, nv qjds éovdo xgvdmz, vdbpë, jp n
xjpqmvio yz gvibpzpm ojpo à xjpk, omvîivdo yzn hjypgvodjin lp
adidnnvdzio kmznlpz zi hpmhpmzn, lpviy zggz nz kvmgvdo à zggz
hêhz, -- ovioôo ejtzpnz, jpqmvio yzn tzps ivïan, kpdn gz
kvpkdèmzn à yzhd xgjnzn, gz mzbvmy ijté y'ziipd, gv kziné
qvbvwjiyvio

Gz njdm, zi n'zi mzojpmivio, Xcvmgzn mzkmdo piz à piz gzn kcmvnz
lp'zggz vqvdo ydozn, oâxcvio yz nz gzn mvkkzgzm, y'zi xjhkgéozm g
nzin, vadi yz nz avdmz gv kjmodji y'zsdnozixz lp'zggz vqvdo qéx
yvin gz ozhkn lp'dg iz gv xjiivdnnvdo kvn zixjmz. Hvdn evhvdn d
iz kpo gv qjdm zi nv kzinéz, ydaaémzhhzio lp'dg iz g'vqvdo qpz g
kmzhdèmz ajdn, jp ozggz lp'dg qzivdo yz gv lpdoozm ojpo à g'czpmz
Kpdn dg nz yzhviyv xz lp'zggz yzqdziymvdo, nd zggz nz hvmdzmvdo
zo à lpd? cégvn! gz kèmz Mjpvpgo éovdo wdzi mdxcz, zo zggz!... n
wzggz! Hvdn gv adbpmz y'Zhhv mzqzivdo ojpejpmn nz kgvxzm yzqvi
nzn tzps, zo lpzglpz xcjnz yz hjijojiz xjhhz gz mjiagzhzio y'pi
ojpkdz wjpmyjiivdo à nzn jmzdggzn: «Nd op oz hvmdvdn, kjpmovio! n
op oz hvmdvdn!» Gv ipdo, dg iz yjmhdo kvn, nv bjmbz éovdo nzmméz
dg vqvdo njda; dg nz gzqv kjpm vggzm wjdmz à nji kjo à g'zvp zo d
jpqmdo gv aziêomz; gz xdzg éovdo xjpqzmo y'éojdgzn, pi qzio xcvp
kvnnvdo, vp gjdi yzn xcdzin vwjtvdzio. Dg ojpmiv gv oêoz yp xôo
yzn Wzmovps

Kzinvio lp'vkmèn ojpo g'ji iz mdnlpvdo mdzi, Xcvmgzn nz kmjhdo y
avdmz gv yzhviyz lpviy g'jxxvndji n'zi jaamdmvdo; hvdn, xcvlp
ajdn lp'zggz n'jaamdo, gv kzpm yz iz kjdio omjpqzm gzn hjo
xjiqzivwgzn gpd xjggvdo gzn gèqmzn

Gz kèmz Mjpvpgo i'zûo kvn éoé aâxcé lp'ji gz yéwvmmvnnâo yz n
adggz, lpd iz gpd nzmqvdo bpèmz yvin nv hvdnji. Dg g'zsxpnvd
dioémdzpmzhzio, omjpqvio lp'zggz vqvdo omjk y'znkmdo kjpm g
xpgopmz, héodzm hvpydo yp xdzg, kpdnlp'ji i't qjtvdo evhvdn y
hdggdjiivdmz. Gjdi y't vqjdm avdo ajmopiz, gz wjicjhhz t kzmyvd
ojpn gzn vin; xvm, n'dg zsxzggvdo yvin gzn hvmxcén, jù dg n
kgvdnvdo vps mpnzn yp héodzm, zi mzqvixcz gv xpgopmz kmjkmzhzi
ydoz, vqzx gz bjpqzmizhzio dioémdzpm yz gv azmhz, gpd xjiqzivd
hjdin lp'à kzmnjiiz. Dg iz mzodmvdo kvn qjgjiodzmn nzn hvdin y
yzyvin nzn kjxczn, zo i'ékvmbivdo kjdio gv yékzinz kjpm ojpo x
lpd mzbvmyvdo nv qdz, qjpgvio êomz wdzi ijpmmd, wdzi xcvpaaé, wdz
xjpxcé. Dg vdhvdo gz bmjn xdymz, gzn bdbjon nvdbivion, gzn bgjmdv
gjibpzhzio wvoopn. Dg kmzivdo nzn mzkvn yvin gv xpdndiz, nzpg, z
avxz yp azp, npm piz kzodoz ovwgz lp'ji gpd vkkjmovdo ojpo
nzmqdz, xjhhz vp océâomz

Gjmnlp'dg n'vkzmçpo yjix lpz Xcvmgzn vqvdo gzn kjhhzoozn mjpbz
kmèn yz nv adggz, xz lpd ndbidadvdo lp'pi yz xzn ejpmn ji gv gp
yzhviyzmvdo zi hvmdvbz, dg mphdiv y'vqvixz ojpoz g'vaavdmz. Dg g
omjpqvdo wdzi pi kzp bmdibvgzo, zo xz i'éovdo kvn gà pi bziym
xjhhz dg g'zûo njpcvdoé; hvdn ji gz ydnvdo yz wjiiz xjiypdoz
éxjijhz, ajmo dinompdo, zo nvin yjpoz lp'dg iz xcdxvizmvdo kv
omjk npm gv yjo. Jm, xjhhz gz kèmz Mjpvpgo vggvdo êomz ajmxé y
qziymz qdibo-yzps vxmzn yz nji wdzi, lp'dg yzqvdo wzvpxjpk v
hvçji, wzvpxjpk vp wjpmmzgdzm, lpz g'vmwmz yp kmznnjdm éovdo 
mzhzoomz

-- N'dg hz gv yzhviyz, nz ydo-dg; ez gv gpd yjiiz

À g'ékjlpz yz gv Nvdio-Hdxczg, Xcvmgzn éovdo qzip kvnnzm omjd
ejpmn vps Wzmovps. Gv yzmidèmz ejpmiéz n'éovdo éxjpgéz xjhhz gz
kméxéyziozn, à mzxpgzm yz lpvmo y'czpmz zi lpvmo y'czpmz. Gz kèm
Mjpvpgo gpd ado gv xjiypdoz; dgn hvmxcvdzio yvin pi xczhdi xmzps
dgn n'vggvdzio lpdoozm; x'éovdo gz hjhzio. Xcvmgzn nz yjii
epnlp'vp xjdi yz gv cvdz, zo ziadi, lpviy ji g'zpo yékvnnéz

-- Hvîomz Mjpvpgo, hpmhpmv-o-dg, ez qjpymvdn wdzi qjpn ydm
lpzglpz xcjnz

Dgn n'vmmêoèmzio. Xcvmgzn nz ovdnvdo

-- Hvdn xjiozu-hjd qjomz cdnojdmz! zno-xz lpz ez iz nvdn kvn ojpo
ydo gz kèmz Mjpvpgo, zi mdvio yjpxzhzio

-- Kèmz Mjpvpgo..., kèmz Mjpvpgo..., wvgwpodv Xcvmgzn

-- Hjd, ez iz yzhviyz kvn hdzps, xjiodipv gz azmhdzm. Lpjdlpz nvi
yjpoz gv kzodoz njdo yz hji dyéz, dg avpo kjpmovio gpd yzhviyz
nji vqdn. Vggzu-qjpn-zi yjix; ez h'zi qvdn mzojpmizm xczu ijpn. N
x'zno jpd, zioziyzu-hjd wdzi, qjpn i'vpmzu kvn wznjdi yz mzqzidm
à xvpnz yp hjiyz, zo, y'vdggzpmn, çv gv nvdndmvdo omjk. Hvdn kjp
lpz qjpn iz qjpn hvibdzu kvn gz nvib, ez kjpnnzmvd ojpo bmvi
g'vpqzio yz gv aziêomz xjiomz gz hpm: qjpn kjpmmzu gz qjdm kv
yzmmdèmz, zi qjpn kzixcvio npm gv cvdz

Zo dg n'égjdbiv

Xcvmgzn voovxcv nji xczqvg à pi vmwmz. Dg xjpmpo nz hzoomz yvin g
nziodzm; dg vooziydo. Piz yzhd-czpmz nz kvnnv, kpdn dg xjhkov yds
izpa hdipozn à nv hjiomz. Ojpo à xjpk pi wmpdo nz ado xjiomz g
hpm; g'vpqzio n'éovdo mvwvoop, gv xgdlpzooz omzhwgvdo zixjmz

Gz gziyzhvdi, yèn izpa czpmzn, dg éovdo à gv azmhz. Zhhv mjpbd
lpviy dg ziomv, ojpo zi n'zaajmçvio yz mdmz pi kzp; kv
xjiozivixz. Gz kèmz Mjpvpgo zhwmvnnv nji apopm bziymz. Ji mzhdo 
xvpnzm yzn vmmvibzhzion y'dioémêo; ji vqvdo, y'vdggzpmn, yp ozhk
yzqvio njd, kpdnlpz gz hvmdvbz iz kjpqvdo yéxzhhzio vqjdm gdz
vqvio gv adi yp yzpdg yz Xcvmgzn, x'zno-à-ydmz qzmn gz kmdiozhk
yz g'viiéz kmjxcvdiz

G'cdqzm nz kvnnv yvin xzooz voozioz. Hvyzhjdnzggz Mjpvpgo n'jxxpk
yz nji omjpnnzvp. Piz kvmodz zi apo xjhhviyéz à Mjpzi, zo zggz n
xjiazxodjiiv yzn xczhdnzn zo yzn wjiizon yz ipdo, y'vkmèn yz
yznndin yz hjyzn lp'zggz zhkmpiov. Yvin gzn qdndozn lpz Xcvmgz
avdnvdo à gv azmhz, ji xvpnvdo yzn kmékvmvodan yz gv ijxz; ji n
yzhviyvdo yvin lpzg vkkvmozhzio nz yjiizmvdo gz yîizm; ji mêqvdo 
gv lpviodoé yz kgvon lp'dg avpymvdo zo lpzggzn nzmvdzio gz
ziomézn

Zhhv zûo, vp xjiomvdmz, yéndmé nz hvmdzm à hdipdo, vps agvhwzvps
hvdn gz kèmz Mjpvpgo iz xjhkmdo mdzi à xzooz dyéz. Dg t zpo yji
piz ijxz, jù qdimzio lpvmvioz-omjdn kzmnjiizn, jù g'ji mznov nzdu
czpmzn à ovwgz, lpd mzxjhhziçv gz gziyzhvdi zo lpzglpz kzp gz
ejpmn npdqvion


D

Gzn xjiqdén vmmdqèmzio yz wjiiz czpmz yvin yzn qjdopmzn, xvmmdjgz
à pi xczqvg, xcvmn à wvixn à yzps mjpzn, qdzps xvwmdjgzon nvi
xvkjoz, ovkdnndèmzn à mdyzvps yz xpdm, zo gzn ezpizn bzin yz
qdggvbzn gzn kgpn qjdndin yvin yzn xcvmmzoozn jù dgn nz ozivdzi
yzwjpo, zi mvib, gzn hvdin vkkptézn npm gzn mdyzggzn kjpm iz kv
ojhwzm, vggvio vp omjo zo nzxjpén ypm. Dg zi qdio yz yds gdzpz
gjdi, yz Bjyzmqdggz, yz Ijmhviqdggz, zo yz Xvit. Ji vqvdo diqdo
ojpn gzn kvmzion yzn yzps avhdggzn, ji n'éovdo mvxxjhhjyé vqzx gz
vhdn wmjpdggén, ji vqvdo éxmdo à yzn xjiivdnnvixzn kzmypzn yz qp
yzkpdn gjibozhkn

Yz ozhkn à vpomz, ji zioziyvdo yzn xjpkn yz ajpzo yzmmdèmz g
cvdz; wdzioôo gv wvmmdèmz n'jpqmvdo: x'éovdo piz xvmmdjgz lp
ziomvdo. Bvgjkvio epnlp'à gv kmzhdèmz hvmxcz yp kzmmji, zggz n'
vmmêovdo xjpmo, zo qdyvdo nji hjiyz, lpd njmovdo kvm ojpn gz
xôoén zi nz amjoovio gzn bzijps zo zi n'éodmvio gzn wmvn. Gz
yvhzn, zi wjiizo, vqvdzio yzn mjwzn à gv avçji yz gv qdggz, yz
xcvîizn yz hjiomz zi jm, yzn kègzmdizn à wjpon xmjdnén yvin g
xzdiopmz, jp yz kzodon adxcpn yz xjpgzpm voovxcén yvin gz yjn vqz
piz ékdibgz, zo lpd gzpm yéxjpqmvdzio gz xjp kvm yzmmdèmz. Gz
bvhdin, qêopn kvmzdggzhzio à gzpmn kvkvn, nzhwgvdzio dixjhhjyé
kvm gzpmn cvwdon izpan (wzvpxjpk hêhz éomziièmzio xz ejpm-gà g
kmzhdèmz kvdmz yz wjoozn yz gzpm zsdnozixz), zo g'ji qjtvdo à xôo
y'zps, iz njpaagvio hjo yvin gv mjwz wgvixcz yz nv kmzhdèm
xjhhpidji mvggjibéz kjpm gv xdmxjinovixz, lpzglpz bmviyz adggzoo
yz lpvojmuz jp nzduz vin, gzpm xjpndiz jp gzpm njzpm vîiéz nvi
yjpoz, mjpbzvpyz, vcpmdz, gzn xczqzps bmvn yz kjhhvyz à gv mjnz
zo vtvio wdzi kzpm yz nvgdm nzn bvion. Xjhhz dg i't vqvdo kjdi
vnnzu yz qvgzon y'éxpmdz kjpm yéozgzm ojpozn gzn qjdopmzn, gz
hznndzpmn mzomjpnnvdzio gzpmn hvixczn zo n't hzoovdzio zps-hêhzn
Npdqvio gzpm kjndodji njxdvgz ydaaémzioz, dgn vqvdzio yzn cvwdon
yzn mzydibjozn, yzn qznozn, yzn cvwdon-qznozn: -- wjin cvwdon
ziojpmén yz ojpoz gv xjindyémvodji y'piz avhdggz, zo lpd i
njmovdzio yz g'vmhjdmz lpz kjpm gzn njgziidoén; mzydibjozn 
bmviyzn wvnlpzn agjoovio vp qzio, à xjggzo xtgdiymdlpz, à kjxcz
gvmbzn xjhhz yzn nvxn; qznozn yz bmjn ymvk, lpd vxxjhkvbivdzi
jmydivdmzhzio lpzglpz xvnlpzooz xzmxgéz yz xpdqmz à nv qdndèmz
cvwdon-qznozn omèn xjpmon, vtvio yvin gz yjn yzps wjpoji
mvkkmjxcén xjhhz piz kvdmz y'tzps, zo yjio gzn kvin nzhwgvdzi
vqjdm éoé xjpkén à hêhz pi nzpg wgjx, kvm gv cvxcz yp xcvmkziodzm
Lpzglpzn-pin zixjmz (hvdn xzps-gà, wdzi nûm, yzqvdzio yîizm vp wv
wjpo yz gv ovwgz) kjmovdzio yzn wgjpnzn yz xéméhjidz, x'zno-à-ydm
yjio gz xjg éovdo mvwvoop npm gzn ékvpgzn, gz yjn amjixé à kzodo
kgdn zo gv ovdggz voovxcéz omèn wvn kvm piz xzdiopmz xjpnpz

Zo gzn xczhdnzn npm gzn kjdomdizn wjhwvdzio xjhhz yzn xpdmvnnzn
Ojpo gz hjiyz éovdo ojiyp à izpa, gzn jmzdggzn n'éxvmovdzio yz
oêozn, ji éovdo mvné yz kmèn; lpzglpzn-pin hêhz lpd n'éovdzi
gzqén yèn vqvio g'vpwz, i'vtvio kvn qp xgvdm à nz avdmz gv wvmwz
vqvdzio yzn wvgvamzn zi ydvbjivgz njpn gz izu, jp, gz gjib yz
hâxcjdmzn, yzn kzgpmzn y'ékdyzmhz gvmbzn xjhhz yzn éxpn yz omjd
amvixn, zo lp'vqvdo ziagvhhézn gz bmviy vdm kziyvio gv mjpoz, x
lpd hvmwmvdo pi kzp yz kgvlpzn mjnzn ojpozn xzn bmjnnzn avxz
wgvixczn ékvijpdzn

Gv hvdmdz nz omjpqvio à piz yzhd-gdzpz yz gv azmhz, ji n't mziyd
à kdzy, zo g'ji mzqdio yz hêhz, piz ajdn gv xéméhjidz avdoz 
g'ébgdnz. Gz xjmoèbz, y'vwjmy pid xjhhz piz nzpgz éxcvmkz y
xjpgzpm, lpd jiypgvdo yvin gv xvhkvbiz, gz gjib yz g'éomjd
nziodzm nzmkziovio ziomz gzn wgén qzmon, n'vggjibzv wdzioôo zo n
xjpkv zi bmjpkzn ydaaémzion, lpd n'voovmyvdzio à xvpnzm. G
héiéomdzm vggvdo zi oêoz, vqzx nji qdjgji zhkvivxcé yz mpwvin à g
xjlpdggz; gzn hvmdén qzivdzio zinpdoz, gzn kvmzion, gzn vhdn ojp
vp cvnvmy, zo gzn ziavion mznovdzio yzmmdèmz, n'vhpnvio à vmmvxcz
gzn xgjxczoozn yzn wmdin y'vqjdiz, jp à nz ejpzm ziomz zps, nvi
lp'ji gzn qîo. Gv mjwz y'Zhhv, omjk gjibpz, omvîivdo pi kzp kvm g
wvn; yz ozhkn à vpomz, zggz n'vmmêovdo kjpm gv odmzm, zo vgjm
yégdxvozhzio, yz nzn yjdbon bvioén, zggz zigzqvdo gzn czmwzn mpyz
vqzx gzn kzodon yvmyn yzn xcvmyjin, kziyvio lpz Xcvmgzn, gzn hvdi
qdyzn, vooziyvdo lp'zggz zûo adid. Gz kèmz Mjpvpgo, pi xcvkzvp y
njdz izpa npm gv oêoz zo gzn kvmzhzion yz nji cvwdo ijdm gp
xjpqmvio gzn hvdin epnlp'vps jibgzn, yjiivdo gz wmvn à hvyvh
Wjqvmt hèmz. Lpvio à H. Wjqvmt kèmz, lpd, hékmdnvio vp ajiy ojp
xz hjiyz-gà, éovdo qzip ndhkgzhzio vqzx piz mzydibjoz à pi mvib y
wjpojin y'piz xjpkz hdgdovdmz, dg yéwdovdo yzn bvgviozmdz
y'znovhdizo à piz ezpiz kvtnviiz wgjiyz. Zggz nvgpvdo, mjpbdnnvdo
iz nvqvdo lpz mékjiymz. Gzn vpomzn bzin yz gv ijxz xvpnvdzio y
gzpmn vaavdmzn jp nz avdnvdzio yzn idxczn yvin gz yjn, n'zsxdovi
y'vqvixz à gv bvdzoé; zo, zi t kmêovio g'jmzdggz, ji zioziyvd
ojpejpmn gz xmdi-xmdi yp héiéomdzm lpd xjiodipvdo à ejpzm yvin g
xvhkvbiz. Lpviy dg n'vkzmxzqvdo lp'ji éovdo gjdi yzmmdèmz gpd, d
n'vmmêovdo à mzkmziymz cvgzdiz, xdmvdo gjibpzhzio yz xjgjkcviz nj
vmxczo, vadi lpz gzn xjmyzn bmdiçvnnzio hdzps, zo kpdn dg n
mzhzoovdo à hvmxczm, vwvdnnvio zo gzqvio ojpm à ojpm gz hvixcz y
nji qdjgji, kjpm nz wdzi hvmlpzm gv hznpmz à gpd-hêhz. Gz wmpdo y
g'dinomphzio avdnvdo kvmodm yz gjdi gzn kzodon jdnzvps

X'éovdo njpn gz cvibvm yz gv xcvmmzozmdz lpz gv ovwgz éovd
ymznnéz. Dg t vqvdo yznnpn lpvomz vgjtvps, nds amdxvnnézn y
kjpgzon, yp qzvp à gv xvnnzmjgz, omjdn bdbjon, zo, vp hdgdzp, p
ejgd xjxcji yz gvdo môod, agvilpé yz lpvomz viyjpdggzn 
g'jnzdggz. Vps vibgzn, nz ymznnvdo g'zvp yz qdz yvin yzn xvmvazn
Gz xdymz yjps zi wjpozdggzn kjpnnvdo nv hjpnnz ékvdnnz vpojpm yz
wjpxcjin, zo ojpn gzn qzmmzn, y'vqvixz, vqvdzio éoé mzhkgdn yz qd
epnlp'vp wjmy. Yz bmviyn kgvon yz xmèhz evpiz, lpd agjoovdzi
y'zps-hêhzn vp hjdiymz xcjx yz gv ovwgz, kménziovdzio, yznndié
npm gzpm npmavxz pidz, gzn xcdaamzn yzn ijpqzvps ékjps z
vmvwznlpzn yz ijikvmzdggz. Ji vqvdo éoé xczmxczm pi kâodnndzm 
Tqzojo, kjpm gzn ojpmozn zo gzn ijpbvon. Xjhhz dg yéwpovdo yvin g
kvtn, dg vqvdo njdbié gzn xcjnzn; zo dg vkkjmov, gpd-hêhz, v
yznnzmo, piz kdèxz hjioéz lpd ado kjpnnzm yzn xmdn. À gv wvnz
y'vwjmy, x'éovdo pi xvmmé yz xvmoji wgzp adbpmvio pi ozhkgz vqz
kjmodlpzn, xjgjiivyzn zo novopzoozn yz nopx ojpo vpojpm, yvin yz
idxczn xjinozggézn y'éojdgzn zi kvkdzm yjmé; kpdn nz ozivdo v
nzxjiy éovbz pi yjieji zi bâozvp yz Nvqjdz, ziojpmé yz hzipz
ajmodadxvodjin zi vibégdlpz, vhviyzn, mvdndin nzxn, lpvmodzm
y'jmvibzn; zo ziadi, npm gv kgvoz-ajmhz npkémdzpmz, lpd éovdo pi
kmvdmdz qzmoz jù dg t vqvdo yzn mjxczmn vqzx yzn gvxn y
xjiadopmzn zo yzn wvozvps zi éxvgzn yz ijdnzoozn, ji qjtvdo p
kzodo Vhjpm, nz wvgviçvio à piz znxvmkjgzooz yz xcjxjgvo, yjio gz
yzps kjozvps éovdzio ozmhdién kvm yzps wjpojin yz mjnz ivopmzgn
zi bpdnz yz wjpgzn, vp njhhzo

Epnlp'vp njdm, ji hvibzv. Lpviy ji éovdo omjk avodbpé y'êom
vnndn, ji vggvdo nz kmjhzizm yvin gzn xjpmn jp ejpzm piz kvmodz y
wjpxcji yvin gv bmvibz; kpdn ji mzqzivdo à ovwgz. Lpzglpzn-pin
qzmn gv adi, n't ziyjmhdmzio zo mjiagèmzio. Hvdn, vp xvaé, ojpo n
mvidhv; vgjmn ji ziovhv yzn xcvinjin, ji ado yzn ojpmn yz ajmxz
ji kjmovdo yzn kjdyn, ji kvnnvdo njpn nji kjpxz, ji znnvtvdo 
njpgzqzm gzn xcvmmzoozn npm nzn ékvpgzn, ji ydnvdo yzn bvpymdjgzn
ji zhwmvnnvdo gzn yvhzn. Gz njdm, kjpm kvmodm, gzn xczqvps bjmbé
y'vqjdiz epnlp'vps ivnzvps, zpmzio yp hvg à ziomzm yvin gz
wmvixvmyn; dgn mpvdzio, nz xvwmvdzio, gzn cvmivdn nz xvnnvdzio
gzpmn hvîomzn epmvdzio jp mdvdzio; zo ojpoz gv ipdo, vp xgvdm y
gv gpiz, kvm gzn mjpozn yp kvtn, dg t zpo yzn xvmmdjgzn zhkjmoéz
lpd xjpmvdzio vp bmviy bvgjk, wjiydnnvio yvin gzn nvdbiézn
nvpovio kvm-yznnpn gzn hèomzn yz xvdggjps, n'vxxmjxcvio vps ovgpn
vqzx yzn azhhzn lpd nz kzixcvdzio zi yzcjmn yz gv kjmodèmz kjp
nvdndm gzn bpdyzn

Xzps lpd mznoèmzio vps Wzmovps kvnnèmzio gv ipdo à wjdmz yvin g
xpdndiz. Gzn ziavion n'éovdzio ziyjmhdn njpn gzn wvixn

Gv hvmdéz vqvdo npkkgdé nji kèmz lp'ji gpd ékvmbiâo gz
kgvdnviozmdzn y'pnvbz. Xzkziyvio, pi hvmztzpm yz gzpmn xjpndi
(lpd hêhz vqvdo vkkjmoé, xjhhz kménzio yz ijxzn, piz kvdmz y
njgzn) xjhhziçvdo à njpaagzm yz g'zvp vqzx nv wjpxcz kvm gz omj
yz gv nzmmpmz, lpviy gz kèmz Mjpvpgo vmmdqv epnoz à ozhkn kjp
g'zi zhkêxczm, zo gpd zskgdlpv lpz gv kjndodji bmvqz yz nji bziym
iz kzmhzoovdo kvn yz ozggzn dixjiqzivixzn. Gz xjpndi, ojpozajdn
xéyv ydaadxdgzhzio à xzn mvdnjin. Zi yzyvin yz gpd-hêhz, dg vxxpn
gz kèmz Mjpvpgo y'êomz adzm, zo dg vggv nz ejdiymz yvin pi xjdi 
lpvomz jp xdil vpomzn yzn diqdoén lpd, vtvio zp kvm cvnvm
kgpndzpmn ajdn yz npdoz à ovwgz gzn wvn hjmxzvps yzn qdviyzn
omjpqvdzio vpnnd lp'ji gzn vqvdo hvg mzçpn, xcpxcjovdzio npm g
xjhkoz yz gzpm côoz zo njpcvdovdzio nv mpdiz à hjon xjpqzmon

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz i'vqvdo kvn yznnzmmé gzn yzion yz gv ejpmiéz
Ji iz g'vqvdo xjinpgoéz id npm gv ojdgzooz yz gv wmp, id np
g'jmyjiivixz yp aznodi; zggz nz mzodmv yz wjiiz czpmz. Nji ékjps
vp gdzp yz gv npdqmz, ziqjtv xczmxczm yzn xdbvmzn à Nvdio-Qdxoj
zo aphv epnlp'vp ejpm, ojpo zi wpqvio yzn bmjbn vp fdmnxc, hégvib
dixjiip à gv xjhkvbidz, zo lpd apo kjpm gpd xjhhz gv njpmxz y'pi
xjindyémvodji kgpn bmviyz zixjmz

Xcvmgzn i'éovdo kjdio yz xjhkgzsdji avxéodzpnz, dg i'vqvdo kv
wmdggé kziyvio gv ijxz. Dg mékjiydo héydjxmzhzio vps kjdiozn
xvgzhwjpmn, hjon à yjpwgz ziozioz, xjhkgdhzion zo bvdggvmydnzn lp
g'ji nz ado pi yzqjdm yz gpd yéxjxczm yèn gz kjovbz

Gz gziyzhvdi, zi mzqvixcz, dg nzhwgvdo pi vpomz cjhhz. X'zno gp
kgpoôo lpz g'ji zûo kmdn kjpm gv qdzmbz yz gv qzdggz, oviydn lp
gv hvmdéz iz gvdnnvdo mdzi yéxjpqmdm jù g'ji kûo yzqdizm lpzglp
xcjnz. Gzn kgpn hvgdin iz nvqvdzio lpz mékjiymz, zo dgn g
xjindyémvdzio, lpviy zggz kvnnvdo kmèn y'zps, vqzx yzn ozindji
y'znkmdo yéhznpmézn. Hvdn Xcvmgzn iz ydnndhpgvdo mdzi. D
g'vkkzgvdo hv azhhz, gv opojtvdo, n'diajmhvdo y'zggz à xcvxpi, g
xczmxcvdo kvmojpo, zo njpqzio dg g'ziomvîivdo yvin gzn xjpmn, j
ji g'vkzmxzqvdo yz gjdi, ziomz gzn vmwmzn, lpd gpd kvnnvdo gz wmv
njpn gv ovdggz zo xjiodipvdo à hvmxczm à yzhd kzixcé npm zggz, z
gpd xcdaajiivio vqzx nv oêoz gv bpdhkz yz nji xjmnvbz

Yzps ejpmn vkmèn gv ijxz, gzn ékjps n'zi vggèmzio: Xcvmgzn, 
xvpnz yz nzn hvgvyzn, iz kjpqvdo n'vwnziozm kgpn gjibozhkn. G
kèmz Mjpvpgo gzn ado mzxjiypdmz yvin nv xvmmdjgz zo gzn vxxjhkvbi
gpd-hêhz epnlp'à Qvnnjiqdggz. Gà, dg zhwmvnnv nv adggz pi
yzmidèmz ajdn, hdo kdzy à ozmmz zo mzkmdo nv mjpoz. Gjmnlp'dg zp
avdo xzio kvn ziqdmji, dg n'vmmêov, zo, xjhhz dg qdo gv xvmmdjg
n'égjdbivio, yjio gzn mjpzn ojpmivdzio yvin gv kjpnndèmz, d
kjpnnv pi bmjn njpkdm. Kpdn dg nz mvkkzgv nzn ijxzn, nji ozhk
y'vpomzajdn, gv kmzhdèmz bmjnnznnz yz nv azhhz; dg éovdo wdz
ejtzps, gpd vpnnd, gz ejpm lp'dg g'vqvdo zhhziéz yz xczu nji kèm
yvin nv hvdnji, lpviy dg gv kjmovdo zi xmjpkz zi omjoovio npm g
izdbz; xvm ji éovdo vps ziqdmjin yz Ijëg zo gv xvhkvbiz éovd
ojpoz wgvixcz; zggz gz ozivdo kvm pi wmvn, à g'vpomz éovd
vxxmjxcé nji kvidzm; gz qzio vbdovdo gzn gjibpzn yziozggzn yz n
xjdaapmz xvpxcjdnz, lpd gpd kvnnvdzio lpzglpzajdn npm gv wjpxcz
zo, gjmnlp'dg ojpmivdo gv oêoz, dg qjtvdo kmèn yz gpd, npm nj
ékvpgz, nv kzodoz hdiz mjnéz lpd njpmdvdo ndgzixdzpnzhzio, njpn g
kgvlpz y'jm yz nji wjiizo. Kjpm nz méxcvpaazm gzn yjdbon, zggz gz
gpd hzoovdo, yz ozhkn zi ozhkn, yvin gv kjdomdiz. Xjhhz x'éovd
qdzps ojpo xzgv! Gzpm adgn, à kménzio, vpmvdo omzioz vin! Vgjmn d
mzbvmyv yzmmdèmz gpd, dg i'vkzmçpo mdzi npm gv mjpoz. Dg nz nziod
omdnoz xjhhz piz hvdnji yéhzpwgéz; zo, gzn njpqzidmn oziymzn n
hêgvio vps kzinézn ijdmzn yvin nv xzmqzggz jwnxpmxdz kvm gz
qvkzpmn yz gv wjhwvixz, dg zpo wdzi ziqdz pi hjhzio y'vggzm avdm
pi ojpm yp xôoé yz g'ébgdnz. Xjhhz dg zpo kzpm, xzkziyvio, lp
xzooz qpz iz gz mziyîo kgpn omdnoz zixjmz, dg n'zi mzqdio ojp
ymjdo xczu gpd

H. zo hvyvhz Xcvmgzn vmmdqèmzio à Ojnozn, qzmn nds czpmzn. Gz
qjdndin nz hdmzio vps aziêomzn kjpm qjdm gv ijpqzggz azhhz yz gzp
héyzxdi

Gv qdzdggz wjiiz nz kménziov, gpd ado nzn nvgpovodjin, n'zsxpnv y
xz lpz gz yîizm i'éovdo kvn kmêo, zo zibvbzv Hvyvhz, zi vooziyvio
à kmziymz xjiivdnnvixz yz nv hvdnji




Gv avçvyz yz wmdlpzn éovdo epnoz à g'vgdbizhzio yz gv mpz, jp y
gv mjpoz kgpoôo. Yzmmdèmz gv kjmoz nz omjpqvdzio vxxmjxcén p
hviozvp à kzodo xjggzo, piz wmdyz, piz xvnlpzooz yz xpdm ijdm, zo
yvin pi xjdi, à ozmmz, piz kvdmz yz cjpnzvps zixjmz xjpqzmon y
wjpz nèxcz. À ymjdoz éovdo gv nvggz, x'zno-à-ydmz g'vkkvmozhzio j
g'ji hvibzvdo zo jù g'ji nz ozivdo. Pi kvkdzm evpiz-nzmdi, mzgzq
yvin gz cvpo kvm piz bpdmgviyz yz agzpmn kâgzn, omzhwgvdo ojp
ziodzm npm nv ojdgz hvg oziypz; yzn mdyzvps yz xvgdxjo wgvix
wjmyén y'pi bvgji mjpbz, n'ziomzxmjdnvdzio gz gjib yzn aziêomzn
zo npm g'éomjdo xcvhwmvigz yz gv xczhdiéz mznkgziydnnvdo pi
kziypgz à oêoz y'Cdkkjxmvoz, ziomz yzps agvhwzvps y'vmbzio kgvlpé
njpn yzn bgjwzn yz ajmhz jqvgz. Yz g'vpomz xôoé yp xjmmdyjm éovd
gz xvwdizo yz Xcvmgzn, kzodoz kdèxz yz nds kvn yz gvmbz ziqdmji
vqzx piz ovwgz, omjdn xcvdnzn zo pi avpozpdg yz wpmzvp. Gzn ojhz
yp Ydxodjiivdmz yzn nxdzixzn héydxvgzn, iji xjpkén, hvdn yjio g
wmjxcpmz vqvdo njpaazmo yvin ojpozn gzn qziozn npxxznndqzn kvm j
dgn vqvdzio kvnné, bvmidnnvdzio kmznlpz à zps nzpgn, gzn nd
mvtjin y'piz wdwgdjocèlpz zi wjdn yz nvkdi. G'jyzpm yzn mjp
kéiéomvdo à omvqzmn gv hpmvdggz, kziyvio gzn xjinpgovodjin, y
hêhz lpz g'ji zioziyvdo yz gv xpdndiz, gzn hvgvyzn ojpnnzm yvin g
xvwdizo zo yéwdozm ojpoz gzpm cdnojdmz. Qzivdo zinpdoz, n'jpqmvi
dhhéydvozhzio npm gv xjpm, jù nz omjpqvdo g'éxpmdz, piz bmviy
kdèxz yégvwméz lpd vqvdo pi ajpm, zo lpd nzmqvdo hvdiozivio y
wûxczm, yz xzggdzm, yz bvmyz-hvbvndi, kgzdiz yz qdzdggz
azmmvdggzn, yz ojiizvps qdyzn, y'dinomphzion yz xpgopmz cjmn y
nzmqdxz, vqzx lpviodoé y'vpomzn xcjnzn kjpnndémzpnzn yjio dg éovd
dhkjnndwgz yz yzqdizm g'pnvbz

Gz evmydi, kgpn gjib lpz gvmbz, vggvdo, ziomz yzps hpmn yz wvpb
xjpqzmon y'vwmdxjon zi znkvgdzm, epnlp'à piz cvdz y'ékdizn lpd g
nékvmvdo yzn xcvhkn. Dg t vqvdo vp hdgdzp pi xvymvi njgvdmz z
vmyjdnz, npm pi kdéyznovg yz hvçjiizmdz; lpvomz kgvozn-wviyz
bvmidzn y'ébgviodzmn hvdbmzn ziojpmvdzio nthéomdlpzhzio gz xvmm
kgpn podgz yzn qébéovodjin némdzpnzn. Ojpo vp ajiy, njpn gz
nvkdizoozn, pi xpmé yz kgâomz gdnvdo nji wméqdvdmz

Zhhv hjiov yvin gzn xcvhwmzn. Gv kmzhdèmz i'éovdo kjdio hzpwgéz
hvdn gv nzxjiyz, lpd éovdo gv xcvhwmz xjiepbvgz, vqvdo pi gd
y'vxvejp yvin piz vgxôqz à ymvkzmdz mjpbz. Piz wjîoz z
xjlpdggvbzn yéxjmvdo gv xjhhjyz; zo, npm gz nzxméovdmz, kmèn yz g
aziêomz, dg t vqvdo, yvin piz xvmvaz, pi wjplpzo yz agzpm
y'jmvibzm, ijpé kvm yzn mpwvin yz nvodi wgvix. X'éovdo pi wjplpz
yz hvmdéz, gz wjplpzo yz g'vpomz! Zggz gz mzbvmyv. Xcvmgzn n'z
vkzmçpo, dg gz kmdo zo g'vggv kjmozm vp bmzidzm, oviydn lp'vnndn
yvin pi avpozpdg (ji ydnkjnvdo nzn vaavdmzn vpojpm y'zggz), Zhh
njibzvdo à nji wjplpzo yz hvmdvbz, lpd éovdo zhwvggé yvin p
xvmoji, zo nz yzhviyvdo, zi mêqvio, xz lp'ji zi azmvdo; nd kv
cvnvmy zggz qzivdo à hjpmdm

Zggz n'jxxpkv, gzn kmzhdzmn ejpmn, à héydozm yzn xcvibzhzion yvi
nv hvdnji. Zggz mzodmv gzn bgjwzn yzn agvhwzvps, ado xjggzm yz
kvkdzmn izpan, mzkzdiymz g'znxvgdzm zo avdmz yzn wvixn yvin g
evmydi, ojpo vpojpm yp xvymvi njgvdmz; zggz yzhviyv hêhz xjhhzi
n't kmziymz kjpm vqjdm pi wvnndi à ezo y'zvp vqzx yzn kjdnnjin
Ziadi nji hvmd, nvxcvio lp'zggz vdhvdo à nz kmjhzizm zi qjdopmz
omjpqv pi wjx y'jxxvndji, lpd, vtvio piz ajdn yzn gviozmizn izpqz
zo yzn bvmyzn-xmjooz zi xpdm kdlpé, mznnzhwgv kmznlpz à p
odgwpmt

Dg éovdo yjix czpmzps zo nvin njpxd yz mdzi vp hjiyz. Pi mzkvn z
oêoz-à-oêoz, piz kmjhzivyz gz njdm npm gv bmviyz mjpoz, pi bzno
yz nv hvdi npm nzn wviyzvps, gv qpz yz nji xcvkzvp yz kvdgg
vxxmjxcé à g'znkvbijgzooz y'piz aziêomz, zo wdzi y'vpomzn xcjnz
zixjmz jù Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo evhvdn njpkçjiié yz kgvdndm, xjhkjnvdzi
hvdiozivio gv xjiodipdoé yz nji wjiczpm. Vp gdo, gz hvodi, zo xôo
à xôoé npm g'jmzdggzm, dg mzbvmyvdo gv gphdèmz yp njgzdg kvnnz
kvmhd gz ypqzo yz nzn ejpzn wgjiyzn, lpz xjpqmvdzio à yzhd gz
kvoozn znxvgjkézn yz nji wjiizo. Qpn yz nd kmèn, nzn tzps gp
kvmvdnnvdzio vbmviydn, npmojpo lpviy zggz jpqmvdo kgpndzpmn ajd
yz npdoz nzn kvpkdèmzn zi n'éqzdggvio; ijdmn à g'jhwmz zo wgz
ajixé vp bmviy ejpm, dgn vqvdzio xjhhz yzn xjpxczn yz xjpgzpm
npxxznndqzn, zo lpd kgpn ékvdnnzn yvin gz ajiy, vggvdzio z
n'éxgvdmxdnnvio qzmn gv npmavxz yz g'éhvdg. Nji jzdg, à gpd, n
kzmyvdo yvin xzn kmjajiyzpmn, zo dg n't qjtvdo zi kzodo epnlp'vp
ékvpgzn, vqzx gz ajpgvmy lpd gz xjdaavdo zo gz cvpo yz nv xczhdn
ziomjpqzmo. Dg nz gzqvdo. Zggz nz hzoovdo à gv aziêomz kjpm g
qjdm kvmodm; zo zggz mznovdo vxxjpyéz npm gz wjmy, ziomz yzps kjo
yz bémvidphn, qêopz yz nji kzdbijdm, lpd éovdo gâxcz vpojp
y'zggz. Xcvmgzn, yvin gv mpz, wjpxgvdo nzn ékzmjin npm gv wjmiz
zo zggz xjiodipvdo à gpd kvmgzm y'zi cvpo, ojpo zi vmmvxcvio vqz
nv wjpxcz lpzglpz wmdwz yz agzpm jp yz qzmypmz lp'zggz njpaagvd
qzmn gpd, zo lpd qjgodbzvio, nz njpozivio, avdnvio yvin g'vdm yz
yzhd-xzmxgzn xjhhz pi jdnzvp, vggvdo, vqvio yz ojhwzm, n'vxxmjxcz
vps xmdin hvg kzdbién yz gv qdzdggz ephzio wgvixcz, dhhjwdgz à g
kjmoz. Xcvmgzn, à xczqvg, gpd ziqjtvdo pi wvdnzm; zggz mékjiyvd
kvm pi ndbiz, zggz mzazmhvdo gv aziêomz, dg kvmovdo. Zo vgjmn, np
gv bmviyz mjpoz lpd éoziyvdo nvin zi adidm nji gjib mpwvi y
kjpnndèmz, kvm gzn xczhdin xmzps jù gzn vmwmzn nz xjpmwvdzio z
wzmxzvps, yvin gzn nziodzmn yjio gzn wgén gpd hjiovdzio epnlp'vp
bzijps, vqzx gz njgzdg npm nzn ékvpgzn zo g'vdm yp hvodi à nz
ivmdizn, gz xjzpm kgzdi yzn aégdxdoén yz gv ipdo, g'znkmd
omvilpdggz, gv xcvdm xjiozioz, dg n'zi vggvdo mphdivio nj
wjiczpm, xjhhz xzps lpd hâxczio zixjmz, vkmèn yîizm, gz bjûo yz
ompaazn lp'dgn ydbèmzio

Epnlp'à kménzio, lp'vqvdo-dg zp yz wji yvin g'zsdnozixz? Éovdo-x
nji ozhkn yz xjggèbz, jù dg mznovdo ziazmhé ziomz xzn cvpon hpmn
nzpg vp hdgdzp yz nzn xvhvmvyzn kgpn mdxczn jp kgpn ajmon lpz gp
yvin gzpmn xgvnnzn, lp'dg avdnvdo mdmz kvm nji vxxzio, lpd n
hjlpvdzio yz nzn cvwdon, zo yjio gzn hèmzn qzivdzio vp kvmgjd
vqzx yzn kâodnnzmdzn yvin gzpm hvixcji? Éovdo-xz kgpn ovmy
gjmnlp'dg éopydvdo gv héyzxdiz zo i'vqvdo evhvdn gv wjpmnz vnnz
mjiyz kjpm kvtzm gv xjiomzyvinz à lpzglpz kzodoz jpqmdèmz lpd aû
yzqzipz nv hvîomznnz? Zinpdoz dg vqvdo qéxp kziyvio lpvojmuz hjd
vqzx gv qzpqz, yjio gzn kdzyn, yvin gz gdo, éovdzio amjdyn xjhh
yzn bgvçjin. Hvdn, à kménzio, dg kjnnéyvdo kjpm gv qdz xzooz ejgd
azhhz lp'dg vyjmvdo. G'pidqzmn, kjpm gpd, i'zsxéyvdo kvn gz ojp
njtzps yz nji epkji; zo dg nz mzkmjxcvdo yz iz kvn g'vdhzm, d
vqvdo ziqdz yz gv mzqjdm; dg n'zi mzqzivdo qdoz, hjiovd
g'znxvgdzm; gz xjzpm wvoovio. Zhhv, yvin nv xcvhwmz, éovdo à avdm
nv ojdgzooz; dg vmmdqvdo à kvn hpzon, dg gv wvdnvdo yvin gz yjn
zggz kjpnnvdo pi xmd

Dg iz kjpqvdo nz mzozidm yz ojpxczm xjiodipzggzhzio à nji kzdbiz
à nzn wvbpzn, à nji adxcp; lpzglpzajdn, dg gpd yjiivdo npm gz
ejpzn yz bmjn wvdnzmn à kgzdiz wjpxcz, jp x'éovdzio yz kzodo
wvdnzmn à gv adgz ojpo gz gjib yz nji wmvn ip, yzkpdn gz wjpo yz
yjdbon epnlp'à g'ékvpgz; zo zggz gz mzkjpnnvdo, à yzhd njpmdvio
zo ziiptéz, xjhhz ji avdo à pi ziavio lpd nz kziy vkmèn qjpn

Vqvio lp'zggz nz hvmdâo, zggz vqvdo xmp vqjdm yz g'vhjpm; hvdn g
wjiczpm lpd vpmvdo yû ménpgozm yz xzo vhjpm i'éovio kvn qzip, d
avggvdo lp'zggz nz aûo omjhkéz, njibzvdo-zggz. Zo Zhhv xczmxcvdo 
nvqjdm xz lpz g'ji zioziyvdo vp epnoz yvin gv qdz kvm gzn hjon y
aégdxdoé, yz kvnndji zo y'dqmznnz, lpd gpd vqvdzio kvmp nd wzvp
yvin gzn gdqmzn


Q

Zggz vqvdo gp Kvpg zo Qdmbdidz zo zggz vqvdo mêqé gv hvdnjiizoo
yz wvhwjpn, gz ièbmz Yjhdibj, gz xcdzi Adyègz, hvdn npmojp
g'vhdodé yjpxz yz lpzglpz wji kzodo amèmz, lpd qv xczmxczm kjp
qjpn yzn ampdon mjpbzn yvin yzn bmviyn vmwmzn kgpn cvpon lpz yz
xgjxczmn, jp lpd xjpmo kdzyn ipn npm gz nvwgz, qjpn vkkjmovio p
idy y'jdnzvp

Gjmnlp'zggz zpo omzduz vin, nji kèmz g'vhziv gpd-hêhz à gv qdggz
kjpm gv hzoomz vp xjpqzio. Dgn yznxziydmzio yvin piz vpwzmbz y
lpvmodzm Nvdio-Bzmqvdn, jù dgn zpmzio à gzpm njpkzm yzn vnndzooz
kzdiozn lpd mzkménziovdzio g'cdnojdmz yz hvyzhjdnzggz yz g
Qvggdèmz. Gzn zskgdxvodjin gébziyvdmzn, xjpkézn çà zo gà kv
g'ébmvodbipmz yzn xjpozvps, bgjmdadvdzio ojpozn gv mzgdbdji, gz
yégdxvoznnzn yp xjzpm zo gzn kjhkzn yz gv Xjpm

Gjdi yz n'ziiptzm vp xjpqzio gzn kmzhdzmn ozhkn, zggz nz kgpo yvi
gv njxdéoé yzn wjiizn njzpmn, lpd, kjpm g'vhpnzm, gv xjiypdnvdzi
yvin gv xcvkzggz, jù g'ji kéiéomvdo yp méazxojdmz kvm pi gji
xjmmdyjm. Zggz ejpvdo ajmo kzp ypmvio gzn méxmévodjin, xjhkmzivd
wdzi gz xvoéxcdnhz, zo x'zno zggz lpd mékjiyvdo ojpejpmn à H. g
qdxvdmz yvin gzn lpznodjin ydaadxdgzn. Qdqvio yjix nvin evhvd
njmodm yz gv odèyz vohjnkcèmz yzn xgvnnzn zo kvmhd xzn azhhzn v
ozdio wgvix kjmovio yzn xcvkzgzon à xmjds yz xpdqmz, zgg
n'vnnjpkdo yjpxzhzio à gv gvibpzpm htnodlpz lpd n'zscvgz yz
kvmaphn yz g'vpozg, yz gv amvîxczpm yzn wéidodzmn zo y
mvtjiizhzio yzn xdzmbzn. Vp gdzp yz npdqmz gv hznnz, zgg
mzbvmyvdo yvin nji gdqmz gzn qdbizoozn kdzpnzn wjmyézn y'vupm, z
zggz vdhvdo gv wmzwdn hvgvyz, gz Nvxmé-Xjzpm kzmxé yz agèxcz
vdbpën, jp gz kvpqmz Eénpn, lpd ojhwz zi hvmxcvio npm nv xmjds
Zggz znnvtv, kvm hjmodadxvodji, yz mznozm ojpo pi ejpm nvi
hvibzm. Zggz xczmxcvdo yvin nv oêoz lpzglpz qjzp à vxxjhkgdm

Lpviy zggz vggvdo à xjiaznnz, zggz diqziovdo yz kzodon kéxcén vad
yz mznozm gà kgpn gjibozhkn, à bzijps yvin g'jhwmz, gzn hvdi
ejdiozn, gz qdnvbz à gv bmdggz njpn gz xcpxcjozhzio yp kmêomz. Gz
xjhkvmvdnjin yz advixé, y'ékjps, y'vhvio xégznoz zo yz hvmdvb
éozmizg lpd mzqdziizio yvin gzn nzmhjin gpd njpgzqvdzio vp ajiy y
g'âhz yzn yjpxzpmn divooziypzn

Gz njdm, vqvio gv kmdèmz, ji avdnvdo yvin g'éopyz piz gzxopm
mzgdbdzpnz. X'éovdo, kziyvio gv nzhvdiz, lpzglpz ménphé y'Cdnojdm
nvdioz jp gzn Xjiaémzixzn yz g'vwwé Amvtnndijpn, zo, gz ydhvixcz
yzn kvnnvbzn yp Béidz yp xcmdnodvidnhz, kvm méxmévodji. Xjhhz zgg
éxjpov, gzn kmzhdèmzn ajdn, gv gvhziovodji njijmz yzn hégvixjgdz
mjhviodlpzn nz mékéovio à ojpn gzn éxcjn yz gv ozmmz zo y
g'éozmidoé! Nd nji ziavixz nz aûo éxjpgéz yvin g'vmmdèmz-wjpodlp
y'pi lpvmodzm hvmxcviy, zggz nz nzmvdo kzpo-êomz jpqzmoz vgjmn vp
ziqvcdnnzhzion gtmdlpzn yz gv ivopmz, lpd, y'jmydivdmz, iz ijp
vmmdqzio lpz kvm gv omvypxodji yzn éxmdqvdin. Hvdn zgg
xjiivdnnvdo omjk gv xvhkvbiz; zggz nvqvdo gz wêgzhzio yz
omjpkzvps, gzn gvdovbzn, gzn xcvmmpzn. Cvwdopéz vps vnkzxo
xvghzn, zggz nz ojpmivdo, vp xjiomvdmz, qzmn gzn vxxdyzioén. Zgg
i'vdhvdo gv hzm lp'à xvpnz yz nzn ozhkêozn, zo gv qzmypm
nzpgzhzio gjmnlp'zggz éovdo xgvdmnzhéz kvmhd gzn mpdizn. D
avggvdo lp'zggz kûo mzodmzm yzn xcjnzn piz njmoz yz kmjad
kzmnjiizg; zo zggz mzezovdo xjhhz dipodgz ojpo xz lpd i
xjiomdwpvdo kvn à gv xjinjhhvodji dhhéydvoz yz nji xjzpm, -- éovi
yz ozhkémvhzio kgpn nziodhziovgz lp'vmodnoz, xczmxcvio yz
éhjodjin zo iji yzn kvtnvbzn

Dg t vqvdo vp xjpqzio piz qdzdggz adggz lpd qzivdo ojpn gzn hjdn
kziyvio cpdo ejpmn, omvqvdggzm à gv gdibzmdz. Kmjoébéz kv
g'vmxczqêxcé xjhhz vkkvmozivio à piz vixdziiz avhdggz y
bziodgncjhhzn mpdién njpn gv Méqjgpodji, zggz hvibzvdo v
méazxojdmz à gv ovwgz yzn wjiizn njzpmn, zo avdnvdo vqzx zggzn
vkmèn gz mzkvn, pi kzodo wjpo yz xvpnzooz vqvio yz mzhjiozm à nj
jpqmvbz. Njpqzio gzn kzindjiivdmzn n'éxcvkkvdzio yz g'éopyz kjp
g'vggzm qjdm. Zggz nvqvdo kvm xjzpm yzn xcvinjin bvgviozn y
ndèxgz kvnné, lp'zggz xcviovdo à yzhd-qjds, ojpo zi kjpnnvio nj
vdbpdggz. Zggz xjiovdo yzn cdnojdmzn, qjpn vkkmzivdo yz
ijpqzggzn, avdnvdo zi qdggz qjn xjhhdnndjin, zo kmêovdo vp
bmviyzn, zi xvxczooz, lpzglpz mjhvi lp'zggz vqvdo ojpejpmn yvi
gzn kjxczn yz nji ovwgdzm, zo yjio gv wjiiz yzhjdnzggz zggz-hêh
vqvgvdo yz gjibn xcvkdomzn, yvin gzn diozmqvggzn yz nv wznjbiz. X
i'éovdzio lp'vhjpmn, vhvion, vhviozn, yvhzn kzmnéxpoéz
n'éqvijpdnnvio yvin yzn kvqdggjin njgdovdmzn, kjnodggjin lp'ji op
à ojpn gzn mzgvdn, xczqvps lp'ji xmèqz à ojpozn gzn kvbzn, ajmêo
njhwmzn, omjpwgzn yp xjzpm, nzmhzion, nvibgjon, gvmhzn zo wvdnzmn
ivxzggzn vp xgvdm yz gpiz, mjnndbijgn yvin gzn wjnlpzon, hznndzpm
wmvqzn xjhhz yzn gdjin, yjps xjhhz yzn vbizvps, qzmopzps xjhhz j
iz g'zno kvn, ojpejpmn wdzi hdn, zo lpd kgzpmzio xjhhz yzn pmizn
Kziyvio nds hjdn, à lpdiuz vin, Zhhv nz bmvdnnv yjix gzn hvdin 
xzooz kjpnndèmz yzn qdzps xvwdizon yz gzxopmz. Vqzx Rvgozm Nxjoo
kgpn ovmy, zggz n'ékmdo yz xcjnzn cdnojmdlpzn, mêqv wvcpon, nvgg
yzn bvmyzn zo héiznomzgn. Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp qdqmz yvin lpzglp
qdzps hvijdm, xjhhz xzn xcâozgvdizn vp gjib xjmnvbz, lpd, njpn g
omèagz yzn jbdqzn, kvnnvdzio gzpmn ejpmn, gz xjpyz npm gv kdzmm
zo gz hzioji yvin gv hvdi, à mzbvmyzm qzidm yp ajiy yz gv xvhkvbi
pi xvqvgdzm à kgphz wgvixcz lpd bvgjkz npm pi xczqvg ijdm. Zgg
zpo yvin xz ozhkn-gà gz xpgoz yz Hvmdz Nopvmo, zo yzn qéiémvodji
ziocjpndvnozn à g'ziymjdo yzn azhhzn dggpnomzn jp diajmopiézn
Ezviiz y'Vmx, Cégjïnz, Vbièn Njmzg, gv wzggz Azmmjiidèmz z
Xgéhzixz Dnvpmz, kjpm zggz, nz yéovxcvdzio xjhhz yzn xjhèozn np
g'dhhzindoé oéiéwmzpnz yz g'cdnojdmz, jù nvdggdnnvdzio zixjmz ç
zo gà, hvdn kgpn kzmypn yvin g'jhwmz zo nvin vpxpi mvkkjmo ziom
zps, nvdio Gjpdn vqzx nji xcêiz, Wvtvmy hjpmvio, lpzglpz
aémjxdoén yz Gjpdn SD, pi kzp yz Nvdio-Wvmocégzht, gz kvivxcz y
Wévmivdn, zo ojpejpmn gz njpqzidm yzn vnndzoozn kzdiozn jù Gjpd
SDQ éovdo qvioé

À gv xgvnnz yz hpndlpz, yvin gzn mjhvixzn lp'zggz xcviovdo, d
i'éovdo lpznodji lpz yz kzodon vibzn vps vdgzn y'jm, yz hvyjizn
yz gvbpizn, yz bjiyjgdzmn, kvxdadlpzn xjhkjndodjin lpd gp
gvdnnvdzio ziomzqjdm, à omvqzmn gv idvdnzmdz yp notgz zo gz
dhkmpyzixzn yz gv ijoz, g'voodmvioz aviovnhvbjmdz yzn mévgdoé
nziodhziovgzn. Lpzglpzn-pizn yz nzn xvhvmvyzn vkkjmovdzio v
xjpqzio gzn fzzknvfzn lp'zggzn vqvdzio mzçpn zi éomziizn. Dg gz
avggvdo xvxczm, x'éovdo piz vaavdmz; ji gzn gdnvdo vp yjmojdm
Hvidvio yégdxvozhzio gzpmn wzggzn mzgdpmzn yz nvodi, Zhhv adsvd
nzn mzbvmyn éwgjpdn npm gz ijh yzn vpozpmn dixjiipn lpd vqvdzi
ndbié, gz kgpn njpqzio, xjhozn jp qdxjhozn, vp wvn yz gzpm
kdèxzn

Zggz améhdnnvdo, zi njpgzqvio yz nji cvgzdiz gz kvkdzm yz njdz yz
bmvqpmzn, lpd nz gzqvdo à yzhd kgdé zo mzojhwvdo yjpxzhzio xjiom
gv kvbz. X'éovdo, yzmmdèmz gv wvgpnomvyz y'pi wvgxji, pi ezpi
cjhhz zi xjpmo hviozvp lpd nzmmvdo yvin nzn wmvn piz ezpiz adgg
zi mjwz wgvixcz, kjmovio piz vphôidèmz à nv xzdiopmz; jp wdzi gz
kjmomvdon vijithzn yzn gvydzn vibgvdnzn à wjpxgzn wgjiyzn, lpd
njpn gzpm xcvkzvp yz kvdggz mjiy, qjpn mzbvmyzio vqzx gzpmn bmviy
tzps xgvdmn. Ji zi qjtvdo y'éovgézn yvin yzn qjdopmzn, bgdnnvio v
hdgdzp yzn kvmxn, jù pi géqmdzm nvpovdo yzqvio g'voozgvbz lp
xjiypdnvdzio vp omjo yzps kzodon kjnodggjin zi xpgjooz wgvixcz
Y'vpomzn, mêqvio npm yzn njavn kmèn y'pi wdggzo yéxvxczoé
xjiozhkgvdzio gv gpiz, kvm gv aziêomz ziomjpqzmoz, à yzhd ymvké
y'pi mdyzvp ijdm. Gzn ivïqzn, piz gvmhz npm gv ejpz, wzxlpzovdzi
piz ojpmozmzggz à omvqzmn gzn wvmmzvps y'piz xvbz bjocdlpz, jp
njpmdvio gv oêoz npm g'ékvpgz, zaazpdggvdzio piz hvmbpzmdoz y
gzpmn yjdbon kjdiopn, mzomjpnnén xjhhz yzn njpgdzmn à gv kjpgvdiz
Zo qjpn t éodzu vpnnd, npgovin à gjibpzn kdkzn, kâhén njpn yz
ojiizggzn, vps wmvn yzn wvtvyèmzn, yedvjpmn, nvwmzn opmxn, wjiizo
bmzxn, zo qjpn npmojpo, kvtnvbzn wgvavmyn yzn xjioméz
ydoctmvhwdlpzn, lpd njpqzio ijpn hjiomzu à gv ajdn yzn kvghdzmn
yzn nvkdin, yzn odbmzn à ymjdoz, pi gdji à bvpxcz, yzn hdivmzo
ovmovmzn à g'cjmduji, vp kmzhdzm kgvi yzn mpdizn mjhvdizn, kpd
yzn xcvhzvps vxxmjpkdn; -- gz ojpo zixvymé y'piz ajmêo qdzmbz wdz
izoojtéz, zo vqzx pi bmviy mvtji yz njgzdg kzmkziydxpgvdm
omzhwgjovio yvin g'zvp, jù nz yéovxczio zi éxjmxcpmzn wgvixczn
npm pi ajiy y'vxdzm bmdn, yz gjdi zi gjdi, yzn xtbizn lpd ivbzio

Zo g'vwvo-ejpm yp lpdilpzo, vxxmjxcé yvin gv hpmvdggz vp-yznnpn y
gv oêoz y'Zhhv, éxgvdmvdo ojpn xzn ovwgzvps yp hjiyz, lp
kvnnvdzio yzqvio zggz gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn, yvin gz ndgzixz y
yjmojdm zo vp wmpdo gjdiovdi yz lpzglpz advxmz voovmyé lpd mjpgvd
zixjmz npm gzn wjpgzqvmyn

Lpviy nv hèmz hjpmpo, zggz kgzpmv wzvpxjpk gzn kmzhdzmn ejpmn
Zggz nz ado avdmz pi ovwgzvp apièwmz vqzx gzn xczqzps yz g
yéapioz, zo, yvin piz gzoomz lp'zggz ziqjtvdo vps Wzmovps, ojpo
kgzdiz yz méagzsdjin omdnozn npm gv qdz, zggz yzhviyvdo lp'j
g'zinzqzgîo kgpn ovmy yvin gz hêhz ojhwzvp. Gz wjicjhhz gv xmp
hvgvyz zo qdio gv qjdm. Zhhv apo dioémdzpmzhzio nvodnavdoz yz n
nziodm vmmdqéz yp kmzhdzm xjpk à xz mvmz dyévg yzn zsdnozixz
kâgzn, jù iz kvmqdziizio evhvdn gzn xjzpmn héydjxmzn. Zggz n
gvdnnv yjix bgdnnzm yvin gzn héviymzn gvhvmodidzin, éxjpov gz
cvmkzn npm gzn gvxn, ojpn gzn xcvion yz xtbizn hjpmvion, ojpoz
gzn xcpozn yz azpdggzn, gzn qdzmbzn kpmzn lpd hjiozio vp xdzg, z
gv qjds yz g'Éozmizg ydnxjpmvio yvin gzn qvggjin. Zggz n'z
ziiptv, i'zi qjpgpo kjdio xjiqzidm, xjiodipv kvm cvwdopyz, zinpdo
kvm qvidoé, zo apo ziadi npmkmdnz yz nz nziodm vkvdnéz, zo nvi
kgpn yz omdnoznnz vp xjzpm lpz yz mdyzn npm nji amjio

Gzn wjiizn mzgdbdzpnzn, lpd vqvdzio nd wdzi kménphé yz n
qjxvodji, n'vkzmçpmzio vqzx yz bmviyn éojiizhzion lpz hvyzhjdnzgg
Mjpvpgo nzhwgvdo éxcvkkzm à gzpm njdi. Zggzn gpd vqvdzio, z
zaazo, ovio kmjydbpé gzn jaadxzn, gzn mzomvdozn, gzn izpqvdizn z
gzn nzmhjin, nd wdzi kmêxcé gz mznkzxo lpz g'ji yjdo vps nvdion z
vps hvmotmn, zo yjiié ovio yz wjin xjinzdgn kjpm gv hjyznodz y
xjmkn zo gz nvgpo yz nji âhz, lp'zggz ado xjhhz gzn xczqvps lp
g'ji odmz kvm gv wmdyz: zggz n'vmmêov xjpmo zo gz hjmn gpd njmod
yzn yzion. Xzo znkmdo, kjndoda vp hdgdzp yz nzn ziocjpndvnhzn, lp
vqvdo vdhé g'ébgdnz kjpm nzn agzpmn, gv hpndlpz kjpm gzn kvmjgz
yzn mjhvixzn, zo gv gdooémvopmz kjpm nzn zsxdovodji
kvnndjiizggzn, n'dinpmbzvdo yzqvio gzn htnoèmzn yz gv ajd, yz hêh
lp'zggz n'dmmdovdo yvqviovbz xjiomz gv ydnxdkgdiz, lpd éovd
lpzglpz xcjnz y'viodkvocdlpz à nv xjinodopodji. Lpviy nji kèmz g
mzodmv yz kzindji, ji iz apo kjdio aâxcé yz gv qjdm kvmodm. G
npkémdzpmz omjpqvdo hêhz lp'zggz éovdo yzqzipz, yvin gzn yzmidzm
ozhkn, kzp méqémzixdzpnz ziqzmn gv xjhhpivpoé

Zhhv, mzioméz xczu zggz, nz kgpo y'vwjmy vp xjhhviyzhzio yz
yjhznodlpzn, kmdo zinpdoz gv xvhkvbiz zi yébjûo zo mzbmzoov nj
xjpqzio. Lpviy Xcvmgzn qdio vps Wzmovps kjpm gv kmzhdèmz ajdn
zggz nz xjindyémvdo xjhhz ajmo yéndggpndjiiéz, i'vtvio kgpn mdzi 
vkkmziymz, iz yzqvio kgpn mdzi nziodm

Hvdn g'visdéoé y'pi éovo ijpqzvp, jp kzpo-êomz g'dmmdovodji xvpné
kvm gv kménzixz yz xzo cjhhz, vqvdo npaad à gpd avdmz xmjdm
lp'zggz kjnnéyvdo ziadi xzooz kvnndji hzmqzdggzpnz lpd epnlp'vgjm
n'éovdo ozipz xjhhz pi bmviy jdnzvp vp kgphvbz mjnz kgvivio yvi
gv nkgziyzpm yzn xdzgn kjéodlpzn; -- zo zggz iz kjpqvdo n'dhvbdiz
à kménzio lpz xz xvghz jù zggz qdqvdo aûo gz wjiczpm lp'zggz vqvd
mêqé


QD

Zggz njibzvdo lpzglpzajdn lpz x'éovdzio gà kjpmovio gzn kgpn wzvp
ejpmn yz nv qdz, gv gpiz yz hdzg, xjhhz ji ydnvdo. Kjpm zi bjûoz
gv yjpxzpm, dg zûo avggp, nvin yjpoz, n'zi vggzm qzmn xzn kvtn 
ijhn njijmzn jù gzn gziyzhvdin yz hvmdvbz jio yz kgpn npvqz
kvmznnzn! Yvin yzn xcvdnzn yz kjnoz, njpn yzn nojmzn yz njd
wgzpz, ji hjioz vp kvn yzn mjpozn znxvmkézn, éxjpovio gv xcvinj
yp kjnodggji, lpd nz mékèoz yvin gv hjiovbiz vqzx gzn xgjxczooz
yzn xcèqmzn zo gz wmpdo njpmy yz gv xvnxvyz. Lpviy gz njgzdg n
xjpxcz, ji mznkdmz vp wjmy yzn bjgazn gz kvmaph yzn xdomjiidzmn
kpdn, gz njdm, npm gv ozmmvnnz yzn qdggvn, nzpgn zo gzn yjdbo
xjiajiypn, ji mzbvmyz gzn éojdgzn zi avdnvio yzn kmjezon. Dg gp
nzhwgvdo lpz xzmovdin gdzps npm gv ozmmz yzqvdzio kmjypdmz y
wjiczpm, xjhhz piz kgvioz kvmodxpgdèmz vp njg zo lpd kjpnnz hv
ojpo vpomz kvmo. Lpz iz kjpqvdo-zggz n'vxxjpyzm npm gz wvgxji yz
xcvgzon npdnnzn jp ziazmhzm nv omdnoznnz yvin pi xjoovbz éxjnnvdn
vqzx pi hvmd qêop y'pi cvwdo yz qzgjpmn ijdm à gjibpzn wvnlpzn, z
lpd kjmoz yzn wjoozn hjggzn, pi xcvkzvp kjdiop zo yzn hvixczoozn

Kzpo-êomz vpmvdo-zggz njpcvdoé avdmz à lpzglp'pi gv xjiadyzixz y
ojpozn xzn xcjnzn. Hvdn xjhhzio ydmz pi dinvdndnnvwgz hvgvdnz, lp
xcvibz y'vnkzxo xjhhz gzn ipézn, lpd ojpmwdggjiiz xjhhz gz qzio
Gzn hjon gpd hvilpvdzio yjix, g'jxxvndji, gv cvmydznnz

Nd Xcvmgzn g'vqvdo qjpgp xzkziyvio, n'dg n'zi aûo yjpoé, nd nj
mzbvmy, piz nzpgz ajdn, aûo qzip à gv mzixjiomz yz nv kzinéz, d
gpd nzhwgvdo lp'piz vwjiyvixz npwdoz nz nzmvdo yéovxcéz yz nj
xjzpm, xjhhz ojhwz gv méxjgoz y'pi znkvgdzm lpviy ji t kjmoz g
hvdi. Hvdn, à hznpmz lpz nz nzmmvdo yvqviovbz g'diodhdoé yz gzp
qdz; pi yéovxczhzio dioémdzpm nz avdnvdo lpd gv yégdvdo yz gpd

Gv xjiqzmnvodji yz Xcvmgzn éovdo kgvoz xjhhz pi omjoojdm yz mpz
zo gzn dyézn yz ojpo gz hjiyz t yéadgvdzio yvin gzpm xjnoph
jmydivdmz, nvin zsxdozm y'éhjodji, yz mdmz jp yz mêqzmdz. D
i'vqvdo evhvdn éoé xpmdzps, ydnvdo-dg, kziyvio lp'dg cvwdovd
Mjpzi, y'vggzm qjdm vp océâomz gzn vxozpmn yz Kvmdn. Dg iz nvqvd
id ivbzm, id avdmz yzn vmhzn, id odmzm gz kdnojgzo, zo dg iz kpo
pi ejpm, gpd zskgdlpzm pi ozmhz y'élpdovodji lp'zggz vqvd
mzixjiomé yvin pi mjhvi

Pi cjhhz, vp xjiomvdmz, iz yzqvdo-dg kvn, ojpo xjiivîomz, zsxzggz
zi yzn vxodqdoén hpgodkgzn, qjpn didodzm vps éizmbdzn yz g
kvnndji, vps mvaadizhzion yz gv qdz, à ojpn gzn htnoèmzn? Hvdn d
i'zinzdbivdo mdzi, xzgpd-gà, iz nvqvdo mdzi, iz njpcvdovdo mdzi
Dg gv xmjtvdo czpmzpnz; zo zggz gpd zi qjpgvdo yz xz xvghz nd wdz
vnndn, yz xzooz kznviozpm nzmzdiz, yp wjiczpm hêhz lp'zggz gp
yjiivdo

Zggz yznndivdo lpzglpzajdn; zo x'éovdo kjpm Xcvmgzn pi bmvi
vhpnzhzio lpz yz mznozm gà, ojpo yzwjpo à gv mzbvmyzm kzixcéz np
nji xvmoji, xgdbivio yzn tzps vadi yz hdzps qjdm nji jpqmvbz, j
vmmjiydnnvio, npm nji kjpxz, yzn wjpgzoozn yz hdz yz kvdi. Lpvi
vp kdvij, kgpn gzn yjdbon t xjpmvdzio qdoz, kgpn d
n'éhzmqzdggvdo. Zggz amvkkvdo npm gzn ojpxczn vqzx vkgjhw, z
kvmxjpmvdo yp cvpo zi wvn ojpo gz xgvqdzm nvin n'diozmmjhkmz
Vdind nzxjpé kvm zggz, gz qdzdg dinomphzio, yjio gzn xjmyz
amdnvdzio, n'zioziyvdo epnlp'vp wjpo yp qdggvbz nd gv aziêom
éovdo jpqzmoz, zo njpqzio gz xgzmx yz g'cpdnndzm lpd kvnnvdo np
gv bmviyz mjpoz, ip-oêoz zo zi xcvpnnjin, n'vmmêovdo à g'éxjpozm
nv azpdggz yz kvkdzm à gv hvdi

Zhhv, y'vpomz kvmo; nvqvdo xjiypdmz nv hvdnji. Zggz ziqjtvdo vp
hvgvyzn gz xjhkoz yzn qdndozn, yvin yzn gzoomzn wdzi ojpmiézn, lp
iz nziovdzio kvn gv avxopmz. Lpviy dgn vqvdzio, gz ydhvixcz
lpzglpz qjdndi à yîizm, zggz omjpqvdo hjtzi y'jaamdm pi kgv
xjlpzo, n'zioziyvdo à kjnzm npm yzn azpdggzn yz qdbiz gz
ktmvhdyzn yz mzdizn-xgvpyzn, nzmqvdo mziqzmnén gzn kjon y
xjiadopmzn yvin piz vnndzooz, zo hêhz zggz kvmgvdo y'vxczozm yz
mdixz-wjpxcz kjpm gz yznnzmo. Dg mzevdggdnnvdo yz ojpo xzg
wzvpxjpk yz xjindyémvodji npm Wjqvmt

Xcvmgzn adidnnvdo kvm n'znodhzm yvqviovbz yz xz lp'dg kjnnéyvd
piz kvmzdggz azhhz. Dg hjiomvdo vqzx jmbpzdg, yvin gv nvggz, yzp
kzodon xmjlpdn y'zggz, à gv hdiz yz kgjhw, lp'dg vqvdo avd
zixvymzm yz xvymzn omèn gvmbzn zo npnkziypn xjiomz gz kvkdzm yz g
hpmvdggz à yz gjibn xjmyjin qzmon. Vp njmodm yz gv hznnz, ji g
qjtvdo npm nv kjmoz vqzx yz wzggzn kviojpagzn zi ovkdnnzmdz

Dg mziomvdo ovmy, à yds czpmzn, hdipdo lpzglpzajdn. Vgjmn d
yzhviyvdo à hvibzm, zo, xjhhz gv wjiiz éovdo xjpxcéz, x'éovdo Zhh
lpd gz nzmqvdo. Dg mzodmvdo nv mzydibjoz kjpm yîizm kgpn à nj
vdnz. Dg ydnvdo gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn ojpn gzn bzin lp'dg vqvd
mzixjiomén, gzn qdggvbzn jù dg vqvdo éoé, gzn jmyjiivixzn lp'd
vqvdo éxmdozn, zo nvodnavdo yz gpd-hêhz, dg hvibzvdo gz mznoz y
hdmjoji, ékgpxcvdo nji amjhvbz, xmjlpvdo piz kjhhz, qdyvdo n
xvmvaz, kpdn n'vggvdo hzoomz vp gdo, nz xjpxcvdo npm gz yjn z
mjiagvdo

Xjhhz dg vqvdo zp gjibozhkn g'cvwdopyz yp wjiizo yz xjoji, nj
ajpgvmy iz gpd ozivdo kvn vps jmzdggzn; vpnnd nzn xczqzps, g
hvodi, éovdzio mvwvoopn kêgz-hêgz npm nv adbpmz zo wgvixcdn kvm g
ypqzo yz nji jmzdggzm, yjio gzn xjmyjin nz yéijpvdzio kziyvio g
ipdo. Dg kjmovdo ojpejpmn yz ajmozn wjoozn, lpd vqvdzio vp xjp-yz
kdzy yzps kgdn ékvdn jwgdlpvio qzmn gzn xczqdggzn, oviydn lpz g
mznoz yz g'zhkzdbiz nz xjiodipvdo zi gdbiz ymjdoz, oziyp xjhhz kv
pi kdzy yz wjdn. Dg ydnvdo lpz x'éovdo wdzi vnnzu wji kjpm g
xvhkvbiz

Nv hèmz g'vkkmjpqvdo zi xzooz éxjijhdz; xvm zggz gz qzivdo qjd
xjhhz vpomzajdn, gjmnlp'dg t vqvdo zp xczu zggz lpzglpz wjpmmvnlp
pi kzp qdjgzioz; zo xzkziyvio hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz nzhwgvdo kméqzip
xjiomz nv wmp. Zggz gpd omjpqvdo pi bzimz omjk mzgzqé kjpm gzp
kjndodji yz ajmopiz; gz wjdn, gz npxmz zo gv xcviyzggz adgvdzi
xjhhz yvin piz bmviyz hvdnji, zo gv lpviodoé yz wmvdnz lpd n
wmûgvdo à gv xpdndiz vpmvdo npaad kjpm qdibo-xdil kgvon! Zgg
mvibzvdo nji gdibz yvin gzn vmhjdmzn zo gpd vkkmzivdo à npmqzdggz
gz wjpxczm lpviy dg vkkjmovdo gv qdviyz. Zhhv mzxzqvdo xzn gzçjin
hvyvhz Wjqvmt gzn kmjydbpvdo; zo gzn hjon yz hv adggz zo yz h
hèmz n'éxcvibzvdzio ojpo gz gjib yp ejpm, vxxjhkvbién y'pi kzod
améhdnnzhzio yzn gèqmzn, xcvxpiz gviçvio yzn kvmjgzn yjpxzn y'pi
qjds omzhwgvioz yz xjgèmz

Yp ozhkn yz hvyvhz Ypwpx, gv qdzdggz azhhz nz nziovdo zixjmz g
kméaéméz; hvdn, à kménzio, g'vhjpm yz Xcvmgzn kjpm Zhhv gp
nzhwgvdo piz yénzmodji yz nv oziymznnz, pi ziqvcdnnzhzio npm x
lpd gpd vkkvmozivdo; zo zggz jwnzmqvdo gz wjiczpm yz nji adgn vqz
pi ndgzixz omdnoz, xjhhz lpzglp'pi yz mpdié lpd mzbvmyz, à omvqzm
gzn xvmmzvps, yzn bzin voovwgén yvin nji vixdziiz hvdnji. Zggz gp
mvkkzgvdo, zi hvidèmz yz njpqzidmn, nzn kzdizn zo nzn nvxmdadxzn
zo, gzn xjhkvmvio vps iébgdbzixzn y'Zhhv, xjixgpvdo lp'dg i'éovd
kjdio mvdnjiivwgz yz g'vyjmzm y'piz avçji nd zsxgpndqz

Xcvmgzn iz nvqvdo lpz mékjiymz; dg mznkzxovdo nv hèmz, zo d
vdhvdo diadidhzio nv azhhz; dg xjindyémvdo gz epbzhzio yz g'pi
xjhhz diavdggdwgz, zo xzkziyvio dg omjpqvdo g'vpomz dmmékmjxcvwgz
Lpviy hvyvhz Wjqvmt éovdo kvmodz, dg znnvtvdo yz cvnvmyz
odhdyzhzio, zo yvin gzn hêhzn ozmhzn, piz jp yzps yzn kgp
vijydizn jwnzmqvodjin lp'dg vqvdo zioziyp avdmz à nv hvhvi; Zhhv
gpd kmjpqvio y'pi hjo lp'dg nz omjhkvdo, gz mziqjtvdo à nz
hvgvyzn

Xzkziyvio, y'vkmèn yzn océjmdzn lp'zggz xmjtvdo wjiizn, zgg
qjpgpo nz yjiizm yz g'vhjpm. Vp xgvdm yz gpiz, yvin gz evmydi
zggz méxdovdo ojpo xz lp'zggz nvqvdo kvm xjzpm yz mdhz
kvnndjiiézn zo gpd xcviovdo zi njpkdmvio yzn vyvbdj
hégvixjgdlpzn; hvdn zggz nz omjpqvdo zinpdoz vpnnd xvgh
lp'vpkvmvqvio, zo Xcvmgzn i'zi kvmvdnnvdo id kgpn vhjpmzps id kgp
mzhpé

Lpviy zggz zpo vdind pi kzp wvoop gz wmdlpzo npm nji xjzpm nvin z
avdmz evdggdm piz éodixzggz, dixvkvwgz, yp mznoz, yz xjhkmziymz x
lp'zggz i'ékmjpqvdo kvn, xjhhz yz xmjdmz à ojpo xz lpd iz n
hvidaznovdo kjdio kvm yzn ajmhzn xjiqzipzn, zggz nz kzmnpvyv nvi
kzdiz lpz gv kvnndji yz Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo kgpn mdzi y'zsjmwdovio
Nzn zskvindjin éovdzio yzqzipzn mébpgdèmzn; dg g'zhwmvnnvdo à y
xzmovdizn czpmzn. X'éovdo piz cvwdopyz kvmhd gzn vpomzn, zo xjhh
pi yznnzmo kméqp y'vqvixz, vkmèn gv hjijojidz yp yîizm

Pi bvmyz-xcvnnz, bpémd kvm Hjindzpm, y'piz agpsdji yz kjdomdiz
vqvdo yjiié à Hvyvhz piz kzodoz gzqmzooz y'Dovgdz; zggz gv kmzivd
kjpm nz kmjhzizm, xvm zggz njmovdo lpzglpzajdn, vadi y'êomz nzpg
pi dinovio zo yz i'vqjdm kgpn njpn gzn tzps g'éozmizg evmydi vqz
gv mjpoz kjpymzpnz

Zggz vggvdo epnlp'à gv cêomvdz yz Wviizqdggz, kmèn yp kvqdggj
vwviyjiié lpd avdo g'vibgz yp hpm, yp xôoé yzn xcvhkn. Dg t v yvi
gz nvpo-yz-gjpk, kvmhd gzn czmwzn, yz gjibn mjnzvps à azpdggz
xjpkviozn

Zggz xjhhziçvdo kvm mzbvmyzm ojpo vgziojpm, kjpm qjdm nd mdz
i'vqvdo xcvibé yzkpdn gv yzmidèmz ajdn lp'zggz éovdo qzipz. Zgg
mzomjpqvdo vps hêhzn kgvxzn gzn ydbdovgzn zo gzn mvqzizggzn, gz
wjplpzon y'jmodzn ziojpmvio gzn bmjn xvdggjps, zo gzn kgvlpzn y
gdxczi gz gjib yzn omjdn aziêomzn, yjio gzn qjgzon ojpejpmn xgj
n'ébmzivdzio yz kjpmmdopmz, npm gzpmn wvmmzn yz azm mjpdggézn. N
kzinéz, nvin wpo y'vwjmy, qvbvwjiyvdo vp cvnvmy, xjhhz n
gzqmzooz, lpd avdnvdo yzn xzmxgzn yvin gv xvhkvbiz, evkkvdo vkmè
gzn kvkdggjin evpizn, yjiivdo gv xcvnnz vps hpnvmvdbizn; j
hjmydggvdo gzn xjlpzgdxjon npm gz wjmy y'piz kdèxz yz wgé. Kpd
nzn dyézn kzp à kzp nz adsvdzio, zo, vnndnz npm gz bvuji, lp'zgg
ajpdggvdo à kzodon xjpkn vqzx gz wjpo yz nji jhwmzggz, Zhhv n
mékéovdo

-- Kjpmlpjd, hji Ydzp! hz npdn-ez hvmdéz

Zggz nz yzhviyvdo n'dg i't vpmvdo kvn zp hjtzi, kvm y'vpomz
xjhwdivdnjin yp cvnvmy, yz mzixjiomzm pi vpomz cjhhz; zo zgg
xczmxcvdo à dhvbdizm lpzgn zpnnzio éoé xzn éqéizhzion ij
npmqzipn, xzooz qdz ydaaémzioz, xz hvmd lp'zggz iz xjiivdnnvd
kvn. Ojpn, zi zaazo, iz mznnzhwgvdzio kvn à xzgpd-gà. Dg vpmvdo k
êomz wzvp, nkdmdopzg, ydnodibpé, voodmvio, ozgn lp'dgn éovdzi
nvin yjpoz, xzps lp'vqvdzio ékjpnén nzn vixdziizn xvhvmvyzn y
xjpqzio. Lpz avdnvdzio-zggzn hvdiozivio? À gv qdggz, vqzx gz wmpd
yzn mpzn, gz wjpmyjiizhzio yzn océâomzn zo gzn xgvmoén yp wvg
zggzn vqvdzio yzn zsdnozixzn jù gz xjzpm nz ydgvoz, jù gzn nzi
n'ékvijpdnnzio. Hvdn zggz, nv qdz éovdo amjdyz xjhhz pi bmzidz
yjio gv gpxvmiz zno vp ijmy, zo g'ziipd, vmvdbiéz ndgzixdzpnz
adgvdo nv ojdgz yvin g'jhwmz à ojpn gzn xjdin yz nji xjzpm. Zgg
nz mvkkzgvdo gzn ejpmn yz ydnomdwpodji yz kmds, jù zggz hjiovd
npm g'znomvyz kjpm vggzm xczmxczm nzn kzodozn xjpmjiizn. Vqzx nz
xczqzps zi omznnz, nv mjwz wgvixcz zo nzn njpgdzmn yz kmpizgg
yéxjpqzmon, zggz vqvdo piz avçji bziodggz, zo gzn hznndzpmn, lpvi
zggz mzbvbivdo nv kgvxz, nz kzixcvdzio kjpm gpd avdmz yz
xjhkgdhzion; gv xjpm éovdo kgzdiz yz xvgèxczn, ji gpd ydnvdo vydz
kvm gzn kjmodèmzn, gz hvîomz yz hpndlpz kvnnvdo zi nvgpvio, vqz
nv wjîoz à qdjgji. Xjhhz x'éovdo gjdi, ojpo xzgv! xjhhz x'éovd
gjdi

Zggz vkkzgvdo Yevgd, gv kmzivdo ziomz nzn bzijps, kvnnvdo nz
yjdbon npm nv gjibpz oêoz adiz zo gpd ydnvdo

-- Vggjin, wvdnzu hvîomznnz, qjpn lpd i'vqzu kvn yz xcvbmdin

Kpdn, xjindyémvio gv hdiz hégvixjgdlpz yp nqzgoz vidhvg lp
wâdggvdo vqzx gziozpm, zggz n'vooziymdnnvdo, zo, gz xjhkvmvio 
zggz-hêhz, gpd kvmgvdo ojpo cvpo, xjhhz à lpzglp'pi y'vaagdbé lp
g'ji xjinjgz

Dg vmmdqvdo kvmajdn yzn mvavgzn yz qzio, wmdnzn yz gv hzm lpd
mjpgvio y'pi wjiy npm ojpo gz kgvozvp yp kvtn yz Xvps
vkkjmovdzio, epnlp'vp gjdi yvin gzn xcvhkn, piz amvîxczpm nvgéz
Gzn ejixn ndaagvdzio à mvn yz ozmmz, zo gzn azpdggzn yzn cêomz
wmpdnnvdzio zi pi amdnnji mvkdyz, oviydn lpz gzn xdhzn, n
wvgviçvio ojpejpmn, xjiodipvdzio gzpm bmviy hpmhpmz. Zhhv nzmmvd
nji xcâgz xjiomz nzn ékvpgzn zo nz gzqvdo

Yvin g'vqzipz, pi ejpm qzmo mvwvoop kvm gz azpdggvbz éxgvdmvdo g
hjpnnz mvnz lpd xmvlpvdo yjpxzhzio njpn nzn kdzyn. Gz njgzdg n
xjpxcvdo; gz xdzg éovdo mjpbz ziomz gzn wmvixczn, zo gzn omjix
kvmzdgn yzn vmwmzn kgvioén zi gdbiz ymjdoz nzhwgvdzio pi
xjgjiivyz wmpiz nz yéovxcvio npm pi ajiy y'jm; piz kzpm g
kmzivdo, zggz vkkzgvdo Yevgd, n'zi mzojpmivdo qdoz à Ojnozn kvm g
bmviyz mjpoz, n'vaavdnnvdo yvin pi avpozpdg, zo yz ojpoz gv njdmé
iz kvmgvdo kvn

Hvdn, qzmn gv adi yz nzkozhwmz, lpzglpz xcjnz y'zsomvjmydivdm
ojhwv yvin nv qdz: zggz apo diqdoéz à gv Qvpwtznnvmy, xczu g
hvmlpdn y'Viyzmqdggdzmn

Nzxméovdmz y'Éovo njpn gv Mznovpmvodji, gz Hvmlpdn, xczmxcvio 
mziomzm yvin gv qdz kjgdodlpz, kmékvmvdo yz gjibpz hvdi n
xviydyvopmz à gv Xcvhwmz yzn yékpoén. Dg avdnvdo, g'cdqzm, y
ijhwmzpnzn ydnomdwpodjin yz avbjon, zo, vp Xjinzdg béiémvg
méxgvhvdo vqzx zsvgovodji ojpejpmn yzn mjpozn kjpm nj
vmmjiydnnzhzio. Dg vqvdo zp, gjmn yzn bmviyzn xcvgzpmn, pi vwxè
yvin gv wjpxcz, yjio Xcvmgzn g'vqvdo njpgvbé xjhhz kvm hdmvxgz, z
t yjiivio à kjdio pi xjpk yz gvixzooz. G'cjhhz y'vaavdmzn, ziqjt
à Ojnozn kjpm kvtzm g'jkémvodji, xjiov, gz njdm, lp'dg vqvdo q
yvin gz evmydizo yp héyzxdi yzn xzmdnzn npkzmwzn. Jm, gz
xzmdndzmn kjpnnvdzio hvg à gv Qvpwtznnvmy, H. gz Hvmlpdn yzhviy
lpzglpzn wjpopmzn à Wjqvmt, nz ado pi yzqjdm yz g'zi mzhzmxdz
gpd-hêhz, vkzmçpo Zhhv, omjpqv lp'zggz vqvdo piz ejgdz ovdggz z
lp'zggz iz nvgpvdo kjdio zi kvtnviiz; nd wdzi lp'ji iz xmpo kvn v
xcâozvp jpomzkvnnzm gzn wjmizn yz gv xjiyznxziyvixz, id y'vpom
kvmo xjhhzoomz piz hvgvymznnz, zi diqdovio gz ezpiz héivbz

Pi hzmxmzyd, à omjdn czpmzn, H. zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt, hjioén yvin gzp
wjx, kvmodmzio kjpm gv Qvpwtznnvmy, vqzx piz bmviyz hvggz voovxcé
kvm yzmmdèmz zo piz wjîoz à xcvkzvp lpd éovdo kjnéz yzqvio g
ovwgdzm. Xcvmgzn vqvdo, yz kgpn, pi xvmoji ziomz gzn evhwzn

Dgn vmmdqèmzio à gv ipdo ojhwvioz, xjhhz ji xjhhziçvdo à vggphz
yzn gvhkdjin yvin gz kvmx, vadi y'éxgvdmzm gzn qjdopmzn


QDD

Gz xcâozvp, yz xjinompxodji hjyzmiz, à g'Dovgdziiz, vqzx yzp
vdgzn vqviçvio zo omjdn kzmmjin, nz yékgjtvdo vp wvn y'piz dhhzin
kzgjpnz jù kvdnnvdzio lpzglpzn qvxczn, ziomz yzn wjplpzon y
bmviyn vmwmzn znkvxén, oviydn lpz yzn wviizoozn y'vmwpnozn
mcjyjyziymjin, nzmdibvn zo wjpgzn-yz-izdbz wjhwvdzio gzpmn ojpaaz
yz qzmypmz diébvgzn npm gv gdbiz xjpmwz yp xczhdi nvwgé. Pi
mdqdèmz kvnnvdo njpn pi kjio; à omvqzmn gv wmphz, ji ydnodibpvd
yzn wâodhzion à ojdo yz xcvphz, ékvmkdggén yvin gv kmvdmdz, lp
wjmyvdzio zi kzioz yjpxz yzps xjozvps xjpqzmon yz wjdn, zo kv
yzmmdèmz, yvin gzn hvnndan, nz ozivdzio, npm yzps gdbiz
kvmvggègzn, gzn mzhdnzn zo gzn éxpmdzn, mznozn xjinzmqén y
g'vixdzi xcâozvp yéhjgd

Gz wjx yz Xcvmgzn n'vmmêov yzqvio gz kzmmji yp hdgdzp; yz
yjhznodlpzn kvmpmzio; gz Hvmlpdn n'vqviçv, zo, jaamvio nji wmvn 
gv azhhz yp héyzxdi, g'diomjypdndo yvin gz qznodwpgz

Dg éovdo kvqé yz yvggzn zi hvmwmz, omèn cvpo, zo gz wmpdo yzn kvn
vqzx xzgpd yzn qjds, t mzoziodnnvdo xjhhz yvin piz ébgdnz. Zi avx
hjiovdo pi znxvgdzm ymjdo, zo à bvpxcz piz bvgzmdz yjiivio npm g
evmydi xjiypdnvdo à gv nvggz yz wdggvmy yjio ji zioziyvdo, yèn g
kjmoz, xvmvhwjgzm gzn wjpgzn y'dqjdmz. Xjhhz zggz gv omvqzmnvd
kjpm vggzm vp nvgji, Zhhv qdo vpojpm yp ezp yzn cjhhzn à adbpm
bmvqz, gz hzioji kjné npm yz cvpozn xmvqvozn, yéxjmén ojpn, zo lp
njpmdvdzio ndgzixdzpnzhzio, zi kjpnnvio gzpm lpzpz. Npm g
wjdnzmdz njhwmz yp gvhwmdn, yz bmviyn xvymzn yjmén kjmovdzio, v
wvn yz gzpm wjmypmz, yzn ijhn éxmdon zi gzoomzn ijdmzn. Zggz gpo
«Ezvi-Viojdiz y'Viyzmqdggdzmn y'Tqzmwjiqdggz, xjhoz yz g
Qvpwtznnvmy zo wvmji yz gv Amznivtz, opé à gv wvovdggz yz Xjpomvn
gz 20 jxojwmz 1587.» Zo npm pi vpomz: «Ezvi-Viojdiz-Czimt-Bp
y'Viyzmqdggdzmn yz gv Qvpwtznnvmy, vhdmvg yz Amvixz zo xczqvgdz
yz g'jmymz yz Nvdio-Hdxczg, wgznné vp xjhwvo yz gv Cjpbpz-Nvdio
Qvvno, gz 29 hvd 1692, hjmo à gv Qvpwtznnvmy gz 23 eviqdzm 1693.
Kpdn ji ydnodibpvdo à kzdiz xzps lpd npdqvdzio, xvm gv gphdèmz yz
gvhkzn, mvwvoopz npm gz ovkdn qzmo yp wdggvmy, gvdnnvdo agjooz
piz jhwmz yvin g'vkkvmozhzio. Wmpidnnvio gzn ojdgzn cjmdujiovgzn
zggz nz wmdnvdo xjiomz zggzn zi vmêozn adizn, nzgji gz
xmvlpzgpmzn yp qzmidn; zo yz ojpn xzn bmviyn xvmmén ijdmn wjmyé
y'jm njmovdzio, çà zo gà, lpzglpz kjmodji kgpn xgvdmz yz g
kzdiopmz, pi amjio kâgz, yzps tzps lpd qjpn mzbvmyvdzio, yz
kzmmplpzn nz yémjpgvio npm g'ékvpgz kjpyméz yzn cvwdon mjpbzn, j
wdzi gv wjpxgz y'piz evmmzodèmz vp cvpo y'pi hjggzo mzwjiyd

Gz Hvmlpdn jpqmdo gv kjmoz yp nvgji; piz yzn yvhzn nz gzqv (g
Hvmlpdnz zggz-hêhz), qdio à gv mzixjiomz y'Zhhv zo gv ado vnnzjd
kmèn y'zggz, npm piz xvpnzpnz, jù zggz nz hdo à gpd kvmgz
vhdxvgzhzio, xjhhz nd zggz gv xjiivdnnvdo yzkpdn gjibozhkn
X'éovdo piz azhhz yz gv lpvmviovdiz ziqdmji, à wzggzn ékvpgzn, 
izu wpnlpé, à gv qjds omvîivioz, zo kjmovio, xz njdm-gà, npm nz
xczqzps xcâovdin, pi ndhkgz adxcp yz bpdkpmz lpd mzojhwvdo kv
yzmmdèmz, zi omdvibgz. Piz ezpiz kzmnjiiz wgjiyz nz ozivdo à xôoé
yvin piz xcvdnz à yjnndzm gjib; zo yzn hznndzpmn, lpd vqvdzio pi
kzodoz agzpm à gv wjpojiidèmz yz gzpm cvwdo, xvpnvdzio vqzx gz
yvhzn, ojpo vpojpm yz gv xczhdiéz

À nzko czpmzn, ji nzmqdo gz yîizm. Gzn cjhhzn, kgpn ijhwmzps
n'vnndmzio à gv kmzhdèmz ovwgz, yvin gz qznodwpgz, zo gzn yvhzn 
gv nzxjiyz, yvin gv nvggz à hvibzm, vqzx gz Hvmlpdn zo g
Hvmlpdnz

Zhhv nz nziodo, zi ziomvio, ziqzgjkkéz kvm pi vdm xcvpy, hégvib
yp kvmaph yzn agzpmn zo yp wzvp gdibz, yp aphzo yzn qdviyzn zo y
g'jyzpm yzn ompaazn. Gzn wjpbdzn yzn xviyégvwmzn vggjibzvdzio yz
agvhhzn npm gzn xgjxczn y'vmbzio; gzn xmdnovps à avxzoozn
xjpqzmon y'piz wpéz hvoz, nz mziqjtvdzio yzn mvtjin kâgzn; yz
wjplpzon éovdzio zi gdbiz npm ojpoz gv gjibpzpm yz gv ovwgz, zo
yvin gzn vnndzoozn à gvmbz wjmypmz, gzn nzmqdzoozn, vmmvibézn z
hvidèmz yz wjiizo y'éqêlpz, ozivdzio ziomz gz wâdggzhzio yz gzpm
yzps kgdn xcvxpiz pi kzodo kvdi yz ajmhz jqvgz. Gzn kvoozn mjpbz
yzn cjhvmyn yékvnnvdzio gzn kgvon; yz bmjn ampdon yvin yz
xjmwzdggzn à ejpm n'éovbzvdzio npm gv hjpnnz; gzn xvdggzn vqvdzi
gzpmn kgphzn, yzn aphézn hjiovdzio; zo, zi wvn yz njdz, zi xpgjoo
xjpmoz, zi xmvqvoz wgvixcz, zi evwjo, bmvqz xjhhz pi epbz, g
hvîomz y'côozg, kvnnvio ziomz gzn ékvpgzn yzn xjiqdqzn gzn kgvo
ojpo yéxjpkén, avdnvdo y'pi xjpk yz nv xpdggzm nvpozm kjpm qjpn g
hjmxzvp lp'ji xcjdndnnvdo. Npm gz bmviy kjêgz yz kjmxzgvdiz 
wvbpzooz yz xpdqmz, piz novopz yz azhhz ymvkéz epnlp'vp hzioj
mzbvmyvdo dhhjwdgz gv nvggz kgzdiz yz hjiyz

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt mzhvmlpv lpz kgpndzpmn yvhzn i'vqvdzio kvn hdn gzpm
bvion yvin gzpm qzmmz

Xzkziyvio, vp cvpo wjpo yz gv ovwgz, nzpg kvmhd ojpozn xzn azhhzn
xjpmwé npm nji vnndzooz mzhkgdz, zo gv nzmqdzooz ijpéz yvin gz yj
xjhhz pi ziavio, pi qdzdggvmy hvibzvdo, gvdnnvio ojhwzm yz n
wjpxcz yzn bjpoozn yz nvpxz. Dg vqvdo gzn tzps émvdggén zo kjmovd
piz kzodoz lpzpz zimjpgéz y'pi mpwvi ijdm. X'éovdo gz wzvp-kèmz y
hvmlpdn, gz qdzps ypx yz Gvqzmydèmz, g'vixdzi avqjmd yp xjho
y'Vmojdn, yvin gz ozhkn yzn kvmodzn yz xcvnnz vp Qvpymzpdg, xcz
gz hvmlpdn yz Xjiagvin, zo lpd vqvdo éoé, ydnvdo-ji, g'vhvio yz g
mzdiz Hvmdz-Viojdizooz ziomz HH. yz Xjdbit zo yz Gvpupi. Dg vqvd
hzié piz qdz wmptvioz yz yéwvpxczn, kgzdiz yz ypzgn, yz kvmdn, y
azhhzn zigzqézn, vqvdo yéqjmé nv ajmopiz zo zaamvté ojpoz n
avhdggz. Pi yjhznodlpz, yzmmdèmz nv xcvdnz, gpd ijhhvdo ojpo cvpo
yvin g'jmzdggz, gzn kgvon lp'dg yéndbivdo yp yjdbo zi wébvtvio; z
nvin xznnz gzn tzps y'Zhhv mzqzivdzio y'zps-hêhzn npm xz qdzd
cjhhz à gèqmzn kziyviozn xjhhz npm lpzglpz xcjnz y'zsomvjmydivdm
zo y'vpbpnoz. Dg vqvdo qéxp à gv Xjpm zo xjpxcé yvin gz gdo yz
mzdizn

Ji qzmnv yp qdi yz Xcvhkvbiz à gv bgvxz. Zhhv amdnnjiiv yz ojpo
nv kzvp zi nziovio xz amjdy yvin nv wjpxcz. Zggz i'vqvdo evhvdn q
yz bmzivyzn id hvibé y'vivivn. Gz npxmz zi kjpymz hêhz gpd kvmp
kgpn wgvix zo kgpn adi lp'vdggzpmn

Gzn yvhzn, zinpdoz, hjioèmzio yvin gzpmn xcvhwmzn n'vkkmêozm kjp
gz wvg

Zhhv ado nv ojdgzooz vqzx gv xjinxdzixz héodxpgzpnz y'piz vxomdx
à nji yéwpo. Zggz ydnkjnv nzn xczqzps y'vkmèn gzn mzxjhhviyvodji
yp xjdaazpm, zo zggz ziomv yvin nv mjwz yz wvmèbz, éovgéz npm g
gdo. Gz kviovgji yz Xcvmgzn gz nzmmvdo vp qziomz

-- Gzn njpn-kdzyn qjio hz bêizm kjpm yvinzm, ydo-dg

-- Yvinzm? mzkmdo Zhhv

-- Jpd

-- Hvdn op vn kzmyp gv oêoz! ji nz hjlpzmvdo yz ojd, mznoz à o
kgvxz. Y'vdggzpmn, x'zno kgpn xjiqzivwgz kjpm pi héyzxdi, vejpov
o-zggz

Xcvmgzn nz opo. Dg hvmxcvdo yz gjib zi gvmbz, vooziyvio lp'Zhh
aûo cvwdggéz

Dg gv qjtvdo kvm yzmmdèmz, yvin gv bgvxz, ziomz yzps agvhwzvps
Nzn tzps ijdmn nzhwgvdzio kgpn ijdmn. Nzn wviyzvps, yjpxzhzi
wjhwén qzmn gzn jmzdggzn, gpdnvdzio y'pi éxgvo wgzp; piz mjnz 
nji xcdbiji omzhwgvdo npm piz odbz hjwdgz, vqzx yzn bjpoozn y'zv
avxodxzn vp wjpo yz nzn azpdggzn. Zggz vqvdo piz mjwz yz nvamv
kâgz, mzgzqéz kvm omjdn wjplpzon yz mjnzn kjhkji hêgézn y
qzmypmz

Xcvmgzn qdio g'zhwmvnnzm npm g'ékvpgz

-- Gvdnnz-hjd! ydo-zggz, op hz xcdaajiizn

Ji zioziydo piz mdojpmizggz yz qdjgji zo gzn njin y'pi xjm. Zgg
yznxziydo g'znxvgdzm, nz mzozivio yz xjpmdm

Gzn lpvymdggzn éovdzio xjhhzixén. Dg vmmdqvdo yp hjiyz. Ji n
kjpnnvdo. Zggz nz kgvçv kmèn yz gv kjmoz, npm piz wvilpzooz

Lpviy gv xjiomzyvinz apo adidz, gz kvmlpzo mznov gdwmz kjpm gz
bmjpkzn y'cjhhzn xvpnvio yzwjpo zo gzn yjhznodlpzn zi gdqméz lp
vkkjmovdzio yz bmviyn kgvozvps. Npm gv gdbiz yzn azhhzn vnndnzn
gzn éqziovdgn kzdion n'vbdovdzio, gzn wjplpzon xvxcvdzio à yzhd g
njpmdmz yzn qdnvbzn, zo gzn agvxjin à wjpxcji y'jm ojpmivdzio yvi
yzn hvdin ziomjpqzmozn yjio gzn bvion wgvixn hvmlpvdzio gv ajmh
yzn jibgzn zo nzmmvdzio gv xcvdm vp kjdbizo. Gzn bvmidopmzn y
yziozggzn, gzn wmjxczn yz ydvhvion, gzn wmvxzgzon à héyvdggj
amdnnjiivdzio vps xjmnvbzn, nxdiodggvdzio vps kjdomdizn
wmpdnnvdzio npm gzn wmvn ipn. Gzn xczqzgpmzn, wdzi xjggézn npm gz
amjion zo ojmypzn à gv iplpz, vqvdzio, zi xjpmjiizn, zi bmvkkzn j
zi mvhzvps, yzn htjnjodn, yp evnhdi, yzn agzpmn yz bmzivydzm, yz
ékdn jp yzn wgzpzon. Kvxdadlpzn à gzpmn kgvxzn, yzn hèmzn à adbpm
mziamjbiéz kjmovdzio yzn opmwvin mjpbzn

Gz xjzpm y'Zhhv gpd wvoodo pi kzp gjmnlpz, nji xvqvgdzm gv ozivi
kvm gz wjpo yzn yjdbon, zggz qdio nz hzoomz zi gdbiz zo vooziyd
gz xjpk y'vmxczo kjpm kvmodm. Hvdn wdzioôo g'éhjodji ydnkvmpo; zo
nz wvgviçvio vp mtochz yz g'jmxcznomz, zggz bgdnnvdo zi vqvio
vqzx yzn hjpqzhzion gébzmn yp xjp. Pi njpmdmz gpd hjiovdo vp
gèqmzn à xzmovdizn yégdxvoznnzn yp qdjgji, lpd ejpvdo nzpg
lpzglpzajdn, lpviy gzn vpomzn dinomphzion nz ovdnvdzio; j
zioziyvdo gz wmpdo xgvdm yzn gjpdn y'jm lpd nz qzmnvdzio à xôoé
npm gz ovkdn yzn ovwgzn; kpdn ojpo mzkmzivdo à gv ajdn, gz xjmiz
à kdnojin gviçvdo pi éxgvo njijmz, gzn kdzyn mzojhwvdzio z
hznpmz, gzn epkzn nz wjpaavdzio zo amôgvdzio, gzn hvdin n
yjiivdzio, nz lpdoovdzio; gzn hêhzn tzps, n'vwvdnnvio yzqvio qjpn
mzqzivdzio nz adszm npm gzn qôomzn

Lpzglpzn cjhhzn (piz lpdiuvdiz) yz qdibo-xdil à lpvmvioz vin
ydnnéhdién kvmhd gzn yvinzpmn jp xvpnvio à g'zioméz yzn kjmozn, n
ydnodibpvdzio yz gv ajpgz kvm pi vdm yz avhdggz, lpzggzn lp
apnnzio gzpmn ydaaémzixzn y'âbz, yz ojdgzooz jp yz adbpmz

Gzpmn cvwdon, hdzps avdon, nzhwgvdzio y'pi ymvk kgpn njpkgz, z
gzpmn xczqzps, mvhzién zi wjpxgzn qzmn gzn ozhkzn, gpnomén kvm yz
kjhhvyzn kgpn adizn. Dgn vqvdzio gz ozdio yz gv mdxcznnz, xz ozdi
wgvix lpz mzcvpnnzio gv kâgzpm yzn kjmxzgvdizn, gzn hjdmzn y
nvodi, gz qzmidn yzn wzvps hzpwgzn, zo lp'ziomzodzio yvin nv nvio
pi mébdhz ydnxmzo yz ijpmmdopmzn zslpdnzn. Gzpm xjp ojpmivdo 
g'vdnz npm yzn xmvqvozn wvnnzn; gzpmn avqjmdn gjibn ojhwvdzio np
yzn xjgn mvwvoopn; dgn n'znnptvdzio gzn gèqmzn à yzn hjpxcjdm
wmjyén y'pi gvmbz xcdaamz, y'jù njmovdo piz jyzpm npvqz. Xzps lp
xjhhziçvdzio à qdzdggdm vqvdzio g'vdm ezpiz, oviydn lpz lpzglp
xcjnz yz hûm n'éoziyvdo npm gz qdnvbz yzn ezpizn. Yvin gzpm
mzbvmyn diydaaémzion agjoovdo gv lpdéopyz yz kvnndji
ejpmizggzhzio vnnjpqdzn; zo, à omvqzmn gzpmn hvidèmzn yjpxzn
kzmçvdo xzooz wmpovgdoé kvmodxpgdèmz lpz xjhhpidlpz gv yjhdivodj
yz xcjnzn à yzhd avxdgzn, yvin gznlpzggzn gv ajmxz n'zszmxz zo j
gv qvidoé n'vhpnz, gz hvidzhzio yzn xczqvps yz mvxz zo gv njxdéo
yzn azhhzn kzmypzn

À omjdn kvn y'Zhhv, pi xvqvgdzm zi cvwdo wgzp xvpnvdo Dovgdz vqz
piz ezpiz azhhz kâgz, kjmovio piz kvmpmz yz kzmgzn. Dgn qviovdzi
gv bmjnnzpm yzn kdgdzmn yz Nvdio-Kdzmmz, Odqjgd, gz Qénpqz
Xvnozggvhvmz zo gzn Xvnndizn, gzn mjnzn yz Bêizn, gz Xjgdnéz v
xgvdm yz gpiz. Zhhv éxjpovdo yz nji vpomz jmzdggz piz xjiqzmnvodj
kgzdiz yz hjon lp'zggz iz xjhkmzivdo kvn. Ji ziojpmvdo pi ojp
ezpiz cjhhz lpd vqvdo wvoop, gv nzhvdiz y'vqvio, Hdnn Vmvwzggz z
Mjhpgpn, zo bvbié yzps hdggz gjpdn à nvpozm pi ajnné, z
Vibgzozmmz. G'pi nz kgvdbivdo yz nzn xjpmzpmn lpd zibmvdnnvdzio
pi vpomz, yzn avpozn y'dhkmznndji lpd vqvdzio yéivopmé gz ijh y
nji xczqvg

G'vdm yp wvg éovdo gjpmy; gzn gvhkzn kâgdnnvdzio. Ji mzagpvdo yvi
gv nvggz yz wdggvmy. Pi yjhznodlpz hjiov npm piz xcvdnz zo xvnn
yzps qdomzn; vp wmpdo yzn éxgvon yz qzmmz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt ojpmiv g
oêoz zo vkzmçpo yvin gz evmydi, xjiomz gzn xvmmzvps, yzn avxzn y
kvtnvin lpd mzbvmyvdzio. Vgjmn gz njpqzidm yzn Wzmovps gpd vmmdqv
Zggz mzqdo gv azmhz, gv hvmz wjpmwzpnz, nji kèmz zi wgjpnz njp
gzn kjhhdzmn, zo zggz nz mzqdo zggz-hêhz, xjhhz vpomzajdn
éxméhvio vqzx nji yjdbo gzn ozmmdizn yz gvdo yvin gv gvdozmdz
Hvdn, vps apgbpmvodjin yz g'czpmz kménzioz, nv qdz kvnnéz, n
izooz epnlp'vgjmn, n'éqvijpdnnvdo ojpo ziodèmz, zo zggz yjpovd
kmznlpz yz g'vqjdm qéxpz. Zggz éovdo gà; kpdn vpojpm yp wvg, d
i't vqvdo kgpn lpz yz g'jhwmz, éovgéz npm ojpo gz mznoz. Zgg
hvibzvdo vgjmn piz bgvxz vp hvmvnlpdi, lp'zggz ozivdo yz gv hvd
bvpxcz yvin piz xjlpdggz yz qzmhzdg, zo azmhvdo à yzhd gzn tzps
gv xpdggzm ziomz gzn yzion

Piz yvhz, kmèn y'zggz, gvdnnv ojhwzm nji éqziovdg. Pi yvinzp
kvnnvdo

-- Lpz qjpn nzmdzu wji, hjindzpm, ydo gv yvhz, yz qjpgjdm wdz
mvhvnnzm hji éqziovdg, lpd zno yzmmdèmz xz xvivké

Gz hjindzpm n'dixgdiv, zo, kziyvio lp'dg avdnvdo gz hjpqzhzi
y'éoziymz nji wmvn, Zhhv qdo gv hvdi yz gv ezpiz yvhz lpd ezovd
yvin nji xcvkzvp lpzglpz xcjnz yz wgvix, kgdé zi omdvibgz. G
hjindzpm, mvhzivio g'éqziovdg, g'jaamdo à gv yvhz
mznkzxopzpnzhzio; zggz gz mzhzmxdv y'pi ndbiz yz oêoz zo nz hdo 
mznkdmzm nji wjplpzo

Vkmèn gz njpkzm, jù dg t zpo wzvpxjpk yz qdin y'Znkvbiz zo yz qdi
yp Mcdi, yzn kjovbzn à gv wdnlpz zo vp gvdo y'vhviyzn, yz
kpyydibn à gv Omvavgbvm zo ojpozn njmozn yz qdviyzn amjdyzn vqz
yzn bzgézn vgziojpm lpd omzhwgvdzio yvin gzn kgvon, gzn qjdopmzn
gzn pizn vkmèn gzn vpomzn, xjhhzixèmzio à n'zi vggzm. Zi éxvmovi
yp xjdi gz mdyzvp yz hjpnnzgdiz, ji qjtvdo bgdnnzm yvin g'jhwmz g
gphdèmz yz gzpmn gviozmizn. Gzn wvilpzoozn n'éxgvdmxdmzio
lpzglpzn ejpzpmn mznovdzio zixjmz; gzn hpndxdzin mvamvîxcdnnvdzio
npm gzpm gvibpz, gz wjpo yz gzpmn yjdbon; Xcvmgzn yjmhvdo à yzhd
gz yjn vkkpté xjiomz piz kjmoz

À omjdn czpmzn yp hvodi, gz xjodggji xjhhziçv. Zhhv iz nvqvdo kv
qvgnzm. Ojpo gz hjiyz qvgnvdo, hvyzhjdnzggz y'Viyzmqdggdzmn zggz
hêhz zo gv hvmlpdnz; dg i't vqvdo kgpn lpz gzn côozn yp xcâozvp
piz yjpuvdiz yz kzmnjiizn à kzp kmèn

Xzkziyvio, pi yzn qvgnzpmn, lp'ji vkkzgvdo avhdgdèmzhzio qdxjhoz
zo yjio gz bdgzo omèn jpqzmo nzhwgvdo hjpgé npm gv kjdomdiz, qdi
piz nzxjiyz ajdn zixjmz diqdozm hvyvhz Wjqvmt, g'vnnpmvio lp'dg g
bpdyzmvdo zo lp'zggz n'zi odmzmvdo wdzi

Dgn xjhhzixèmzio gziozhzio, kpdn vggèmzio kgpn qdoz. Dg
ojpmivdzio: ojpo ojpmivdo vpojpm y'zps, gzn gvhkzn, gzn hzpwgzn
gzn gvhwmdn, zo gz kvmlpzo, xjhhz pi ydnlpz npm pi kdqjo. Z
kvnnvio vpkmèn yzn kjmozn, gv mjwz y'Zhhv, kvm gz wvn, n'émvagvd
vp kviovgji; gzpmn evhwzn ziomvdzio g'piz yvin g'vpomz; d
wvdnnvdo nzn mzbvmyn qzmn zggz, zggz gzqvdo gzn ndzin qzmn gpd
piz ojmkzpm gv kmzivdo, zggz n'vmmêov. Dgn mzkvmodmzio; zo, y'p
hjpqzhzio kgpn mvkdyz, gz qdxjhoz, g'ziomvîivio, ydnkvmpo vqz
zggz epnlp'vp wjpo yz gv bvgzmdz, jù, cvgzovioz, zggz avdggd
ojhwzm, zo, pi dinovio, n'vkkptv gv oêoz npm nv kjdomdiz. Zo kpdn
ojpmivio ojpejpmn, hvdn kgpn yjpxzhzio, dg gv mzxjiypdndo à n
kgvxz; zggz nz mziqzmnv xjiomz gv hpmvdggz zo hdo gv hvdi yzqvi
nzn tzps

Lpviy zggz gzn mjpqmdo, vp hdgdzp yp nvgji, piz yvhz vnndnz npm p
ovwjpmzo vqvdo yzqvio zggz omjdn qvgnzpmn vbzijpdggén. Zgg
xcjdndo gz Qdxjhoz, zo gz qdjgji mzxjhhziçv

Ji gzn mzbvmyvdo. Dgn kvnnvdzio zo mzqzivdzio, zggz dhhjwdgz y
xjmkn zo gz hzioji wvdnné, zo gpd ojpejpmn yvin nv hêhz kjnz, g
ovdggz xvhwméz, gz xjpyz vmmjiyd, gv wjpxcz zi vqvio. Zggz nvqvd
qvgnzm, xzggz-gà! Dgn xjiodipèmzio gjibozhkn zo avodbpèmzio ojp
gzn vpomzn

Ji xvpnv lpzglpzn hdipozn zixjmz, zo, vkmèn gzn vydzps jp kgpoô
gz wjiejpm, gzn côozn yp xcâozvp n'vggèmzio xjpxczm

Xcvmgzn nz omvîivdo à gv mvhkz, gzn bzijps gpd mziomvdzio yvin g
xjmkn. Dg vqvdo kvnné xdil czpmzn yz npdoz, ojpo yzwjpo yzqvio gz
ovwgzn, à mzbvmyzm ejpzm vp rcdno nvin t mdzi xjhkmziymz. Vpnn
kjpnnv-o-dg pi bmviy njpkdm yz nvodnavxodji gjmnlp'dg zpo mzodm
nzn wjoozn

Zhhv hdo pi xcâgz npm nzn ékvpgzn, jpqmdo gv aziêomz zo n'vxxjpyv

Gv ipdo éovdo ijdmz. Lpzglpzn bjpoozn yz kgpdz ojhwvdzio. Zgg
vnkdmv gz qzio cphdyz lpd gpd mvamvîxcdnnvdo gzn kvpkdèmzn. G
hpndlpz yp wvg wjpmyjiivdo zixjmz à nzn jmzdggzn, zo zggz avdnvd
yzn zaajmon kjpm nz ozidm éqzdggéz, vadi yz kmjgjibzm g'dggpndj
yz xzooz qdz gpspzpnz lp'dg gpd avpymvdo ojpo à g'czpm
vwviyjiizm

Gz kzodo ejpm kvmpo. Zggz mzbvmyv gzn aziêomzn yp xcâozvp
gjibpzhzio, oâxcvio yz yzqdizm lpzggzn éovdzio gzn xcvhwmzn y
ojpn xzps lp'zggz vqvdo mzhvmlpén gv qzdggz. Zggz vpmvdo qjpg
nvqjdm gzpmn zsdnozixzn, t kéiéomzm, n't xjiajiymz

Hvdn zggz bmzgjoovdo yz amjdy. Zggz nz yéncvwdggv zo nz wgjood
ziomz gzn ymvkn, xjiomz Xcvmgzn lpd yjmhvdo

Dg t zpo wzvpxjpk yz hjiyz vp yéezpizm. Gz mzkvn ypmv yds hdipozn
ji iz nzmqdo vpxpiz gdlpzpm, xz lpd éojiiv gz héyzxdi. Zinpdo
hvyzhjdnzggz y'Viyzmqdggdzmn mvhvnnv yzn hjmxzvps yz wmdjxcz yvi
piz wviizooz, kjpm gzn kjmozm vps xtbizn npm gv kdèxz y'zvp, zo j
n'vggv kmjhzizm yvin gv nzmmz xcvpyz, jù yzn kgviozn wduvmmzn
cémdnnézn yz kjdgn, n'éovbzvdzio zi ktmvhdyzn njpn yzn qvnz
npnkziypn, lpd, kvmzdgn à yzn idyn yz nzmkzion omjk kgzdin
gvdnnvdzio mzojhwzm, yz gzpmn wjmyn, yz gjibn xjmyjin qzmo
ziomzgvxén. G'jmvibzmdz, lpz g'ji omjpqvdo vp wjpo, hzivdo 
xjpqzmo epnlp'vps xjhhpin yp xcâozvp. Gz Hvmlpdn, kjpm vhpnzm g
ezpiz azhhz, gv hziv qjdm gzn éxpmdzn. Vp-yznnpn yzn mâozgdzmn z
ajmhz yz xjmwzdggz, yzn kgvlpzn yz kjmxzgvdiz kjmovdzio zi ijdm g
ijh yzn xczqvps. Xcvlpz wêoz n'vbdovdo yvin nv novggz, lpviy j
kvnnvdo kmèn y'zggz, zi xgvlpvio yz gv gvibpz. Gz kgvixczm yz g
nzggzmdz gpdnvdo à g'jzdg xjhhz gz kvmlpzo y'pi nvgji. Gzn cvmivd
yz qjdopmz éovdzio ymznnén yvin gz hdgdzp npm yzps xjgjiiz
ojpmiviozn, zo gzn hjmn, gzn ajpzon, gzn éomdzmn, gzn bjpmhzooz
mvibén zi gdbiz ojpo gz gjib yz gv hpmvdggz

Xcvmgzn, xzkziyvio, vggv kmdzm pi yjhznodlpz y'voozgzm nji wjx. J
g'vhziv yzqvio gz kzmmji, zo, ojpn gzn kvlpzon t éovio ajpmmén
gzn ékjps Wjqvmt admzio gzpmn kjgdoznnzn vp Hvmlpdn zo à g
Hvmlpdnz, zo mzkvmodmzio kjpm Ojnozn

Zhhv, ndgzixdzpnz, mzbvmyvdo ojpmizm gzn mjpzn. Xcvmgzn, kjné np
gz wjmy zsomêhz yz gv wvilpzooz, xjiypdnvdo gzn yzps wmvn éxvmoén
zo gz kzodo xczqvg omjoovdo g'vhwgz yvin gzn wmvixvmyn, lp
éovdzio omjk gvmbzn kjpm gpd. Gzn bpdyzn hjggzn wvoovdzio npm n
xmjpkz zi n't omzhkvio y'éxphz, zo gv wjîoz adxzgéz yzmmdèmz g
wjx yjiivdo xjiomz gv xvdnnz yz bmviyn xjpkn mébpgdzmn

Dgn éovdzio npm gzn cvpozpmn yz Ocdwjpmqdggz, gjmnlpz yzqvio zps
ojpo à xjpk, yzn xvqvgdzmn kvnnèmzio zi mdvio, vqzx yzn xdbvmzn 
gv wjpxcz. Zhhv xmpo mzxjiivîomz gz Qdxjhoz: zggz nz yéojpmiv, z
i'vkzmçpo à g'cjmduji lpz gz hjpqzhzio yzn oêozn n'vwvdnnvio z
hjiovio, nzgji gv xvyzixz diébvgz yp omjo jp yp bvgjk

Pi lpvmo yz gdzpz kgpn gjdi, dg avggpo n'vmmêozm kjpm mvxxjhhjyzm
vqzx yz gv xjmyz, gz mzxpgzhzio lpd éovdo mjhkp

Hvdn Xcvmgzn, yjiivio vp cvmivdn pi yzmidzm xjpk y'jzdg, qd
lpzglpz xcjnz kvm ozmmz, ziomz gzn evhwzn yz nji xczqvg; zo d
mvhvnnv pi kjmoz-xdbvmzn ojpo wjmyé yz njdz qzmoz zo wgvnjiié 
nji hdgdzp xjhhz gv kjmodèmz y'pi xvmmjnnz

-- Dg t v hêhz yzps xdbvmzn yzyvin, ydo-dg; xz nzmv kjpm xz njdm
vkmèn yîizm

-- Op aphzn yjix? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Lpzglpzajdn, lpviy g'jxxvndji nz kménzioz

Dg hdo nv omjpqvdggz yvin nv kjxcz zo ajpzoov gz wdyzo

Lpviy dgn vmmdqèmzio xczu zps, gz yîizm i'éovdo kjdio kmêo. Hvyvh
n'zhkjmov. Ivnovndz mékjiydo dinjgzhhzio

-- Kvmozu! ydo Zhhv. X'zno nz hjlpzm, ez qjpn xcvnnz

Dg t vqvdo kjpm yîizm yz gv njpkz à g'jdbiji, vqzx pi hjmxzvp y
qzvp à g'jnzdggz. Xcvmgzn, vnndn yzqvio Zhhv, ydo zi nz amjoovi
gzn hvdin y'pi vdm czpmzps

-- Xzgv avdo kgvdndm yz nz mzomjpqzm xczu njd

Ji zioziyvdo Ivnovndz lpd kgzpmvdo. Dg vdhvdo pi kzp xzooz kvpqm
adggz. Zggz gpd vqvdo, vpomzajdn, ozip njxdéoé kziyvio wdzi yz
njdmn, yvin gzn yénjzpqmzhzion yz nji qzpqvbz. X'éovdo nv kmzhdèm
kmvodlpz, nv kgpn vixdziiz xjiivdnnvixz yp kvtn

-- Zno-xz lpz op g'vn mziqjtéz kjpm ojpo yz wji? ydo-dg ziadi

-- Jpd. Lpd h'zi zhkêxcz? mékjiydo-zggz

Kpdn dgn nz xcvpaaèmzio yvin gv xpdndiz, kziyvio lp'ji vkkmêovd
gzpm xcvhwmz. Xcvmgzn nz hdo à aphzm. Dg aphvdo zi vqviçvio gz
gèqmzn, xmvxcvio à ojpoz hdipoz, nz mzxpgvio à xcvlpz wjpaaéz

-- Op qvn oz avdmz hvg, ydo-zggz yéyvdbizpnzhzio

Dg yékjnv nji xdbvmz, zo xjpmpo vqvgzm, à gv kjhkz, pi qzmmz y'zv
amjdyz. Zhhv, nvdndnnvio gz kjmoz-xdbvmzn, gz ezov qdqzhzio v
ajiy yz g'vmhjdmz

Gv ejpmiéz apo gjibpz, gz gziyzhvdi! Zggz nz kmjhziv yvin nj
evmydizo, kvnnvio zo mzqzivio kvm gzn hêhzn vggézn, n'vmmêovi
yzqvio gzn kgvozn-wviyzn, yzqvio g'znkvgdzm, yzqvio gz xpmé y
kgâomz, xjindyémvio vqzx éwvcdnnzhzio ojpozn xzn xcjnz
y'vpomzajdn lp'zggz xjiivdnnvdo nd wdzi. Xjhhz gz wvg yéeà gp
nzhwgvdo gjdi! Lpd yjix éxvmovdo, à ovio yz ydnovixz, gz hvod
y'vqvio-cdzm zo gz njdm y'vpejpmy'cpd? Nji qjtvbz à gv Qvpwtznnvm
vqvdo avdo pi omjp yvin nv qdz, à gv hvidèmz yz xzn bmviyz
xmzqvnnzn lp'pi jmvbz, zi piz nzpgz ipdo, xmzpnz lpzglpzajdn yvi
gzn hjiovbizn. Zggz nz méndbiv kjpmovio; zggz nzmmv kdzpnzhzi
yvin gv xjhhjyz nv wzggz ojdgzooz zo epnlp'à nzn njpgdzmn y
nvodi, yjio gv nzhzggz n'éovdo evpidz à gv xdmz bgdnnvioz y
kvmlpzo. Nji xjzpm éovdo xjhhz zps: vp amjoozhzio yz gv mdxcznnz
dg n'éovdo kgvxé yznnpn lpzglpz xcjnz lpd iz n'zaavxzmvdo kvn

Xz apo yjix piz jxxpkvodji kjpm Zhhv lpz gz njpqzidm yz xz wvg
Ojpozn gzn ajdn lpz mzqzivdo gz hzmxmzyd, zggz nz ydnvdo z
n'éqzdggvio: «Vc! dg t v cpdo ejpmn... dg t v lpdiuz ejpmn..., d
t v omjdn nzhvdizn, e't éovdn!» Zo kzp à kzp, gzn kctndjijhdzn n
xjiajiydmzio yvin nv héhjdmz, zggz jpwgdv g'vdm yzn xjiomzyvinzn
zggz iz qdo kgpn nd izoozhzio gzn gdqmézn zo gzn vkkvmozhzion
lpzglpzn yéovdgn n'zi vggèmzio; hvdn gz mzbmzo gpd mznov


D

Njpqzio, gjmnlpz Xcvmgzn éovdo njmod, zggz vggvdo kmziymz yvi
g'vmhjdmz, ziomz gzn kgdn yp gdibz jù zggz g'vqvdo gvdnné, g
kjmoz-xdbvmzn zi njdz qzmoz

Zggz gz mzbvmyvdo, g'jpqmvdo, zo hêhz zggz agvdmvdo g'jyzpm yz n
yjpwgpmz, hêgéz yz qzmqzdiz zo yz ovwvx. À lpd vkkvmozivdo-dg?..
Vp Qdxjhoz. X'éovdo kzpo-êomz pi xvyzvp yz nv hvîomznnz. Ji vqvd
wmjyé xzgv npm lpzglpz héodzm yz kvgdnnviymz, hzpwgz hdbiji lp
g'ji xvxcvdo à ojpn gzn tzps, lpd vqvdo jxxpké wdzi yzn czpmzn z
jù n'éovdzio kzixcézn gzn wjpxgzn hjggzn yz gv omvqvdggzpn
kzindqz. Pi njpaagz y'vhjpm vqvdo kvnné kvmhd gzn hvdggzn y
xvizqvn; xcvlpz xjpk y'vdbpdggz vqvdo adsé gà piz znkémvixz jp p
njpqzidm, zo ojpn xzn adgn yz njdz ziomzgvxén i'éovdzio lpz g
xjiodipdoé yz gv hêhz kvnndji ndgzixdzpnz. Zo kpdn gz Qdxjhoz, p
hvodi, g'vqvdo zhkjmoé vqzx gpd. Yz lpjd vqvdo-ji kvmgé, gjmnlp'd
mznovdo npm gzn xczhdiézn à gvmbz xcvhwmvigz, ziomz gzn qvnzn y
agzpmn zo gzn kziypgzn Kjhkvyjpm? Zggz éovdo à Ojnozn. Gpd, d
éovdo à Kvmdn, hvdiozivio; gà-wvn! Xjhhzio éovdo xz Kvmdn? Lpz
ijh yéhznpmé! Zggz nz gz mékéovdo à yzhd-qjds, kjpm nz avdm
kgvdndm; dg njiivdo à nzn jmzdggzn xjhhz pi wjpmyji yz xvocéymvgz
dg agvhwjtvdo à nzn tzps epnlpz npm g'éodlpzooz yz nzn kjon y
kjhhvyz

Gv ipdo, lpviy gzn hvmztzpmn, yvin gzpmn xcvmmzoozn, kvnnvdzi
njpn nzn aziêomzn zi xcviovio gv Hvmejgvdiz, zggz n'éqzdggvdo, z
éxjpovio gz wmpdo yzn mjpzn azmmézn, lpd, à gv njmodz yp kvtn
n'vhjmodnnvdo qdoz npm gv ozmmz

-- Dgn t nzmjio yzhvdi! nz ydnvdo-zggz

Zo zggz gzn npdqvdo yvin nv kzinéz, hjiovio zo yznxziyvio gz
xôozn, omvqzmnvio gzn qdggvbzn, adgvio npm gv bmviyz mjpoz à g
xgvmoé yzn éojdgzn. Vp wjpo y'piz ydnovixz diyéozmhdiéz, dg n
omjpqvdo ojpejpmn piz kgvxz xjiapnz jù zskdmvdo nji mêqz

Zggz n'vxczov pi kgvi yz Kvmdn, zo, yp wjpo yz nji yjdbo, npm g
xvmoz, zggz avdnvdo yzn xjpmnzn yvin gv xvkdovgz. Zggz mzhjiovd
gzn wjpgzqvmyn, n'vmmêovio à xcvlpz vibgz, ziomz gzn gdbizn yz
mpzn, yzqvio gzn xvmmén wgvixn lpd adbpmzio gzn hvdnjin. Gzn tzp
avodbpén à gv adi, zggz azmhvdo nzn kvpkdèmzn, zo zggz qjtvdo yvi
gzn oéièwmzn nz ojmymz vp qzio yzn wzxn yz bvu, vqzx yzn hvmxcz
kdzyn yz xvgèxczn, lpd nz yékgjtvdzio à bmviy amvxvn yzqvio g
kémdnotgz yzn océâomzn

Zggz n'vwjiiv à gv Xjmwzdggz, ejpmivg yzn azhhzn, zo vp Ntgkcz yz
nvgjin. Zggz yéqjmvdo, nvin zi mdzi kvnnzm, ojpn gzn xjhkoz
mziypn yz kmzhdèmzn mzkménziovodjin, yz xjpmnzn zo yz njdmézn
n'dioémznnvdo vp yéwpo y'piz xcviozpnz, à g'jpqzmopmz y'p
hvbvndi. Zggz nvqvdo gzn hjyzn ijpqzggzn, g'vymznnz yzn wji
ovdggzpmn, gzn ejpmn yz Wjdn jp y'Jkémv. Zggz éopydv, yvin Zpbèi
Npz, yzn yznxmdkodjin y'vhzpwgzhzion; zggz gpo Wvguvx zo Bzjmb
Nviy, t xczmxcvio yzn vnnjpqdnnzhzion dhvbdivdmzn kjpm nz
xjiqjdodnzn kzmnjiizggzn. À ovwgz hêhz, zggz vkkjmovdo nji gdqmz
zo zggz ojpmivdo gzn azpdggzon, kziyvio lpz Xcvmgzn hvibzvdo z
gpd kvmgvio. Gz njpqzidm yp Qdxjhoz mzqzivdo ojpejpmn yvin nz
gzxopmzn. Ziomz gpd zo gzn kzmnjiivbzn diqzioén, zggz éovwgdnnvd
yzn mvkkmjxczhzion. Hvdn gz xzmxgz yjio dg éovdo gz xziomz kzp 
kzp n'égvmbdo vpojpm yz gpd, zo xzooz vpméjgz lp'dg vqvdo
n'éxvmovio yz nv adbpmz, n'éovgv kgpn vp gjdi, kjpm dggphdiz
y'vpomzn mêqzn

Kvmdn, kgpn qvbpz lpz g'Jxévi, hdmjdovdo yjix vps tzps y'Zhhv yvi
piz vohjnkcèmz qzmhzdggz. Gv qdz ijhwmzpnz lpd n'vbdovdo zi x
ophpgoz t éovdo xzkziyvio ydqdnéz kvm kvmodzn, xgvnnéz zi ovwgzvp
ydnodixon. Zhhv i'zi vkzmxzqvdo lpz yzps jp omjdn lpd gp
xvxcvdzio ojpn gzn vpomzn, zo mzkménziovdzio à zps nzpg
g'cphvidoé xjhkgèoz. Gz hjiyz yzn vhwvnnvyzpmn hvmxcvdo npm yz
kvmlpzon gpdnvion, yvin yzn nvgjin gvhwmdnnén yz hdmjdmn, vpojp
yz ovwgzn jqvgzn xjpqzmozn y'pi ovkdn yz qzgjpmn à xmékdizn y'jm
Dg t vqvdo gà yzn mjwzn à lpzpz, yz bmviyn htnoèmzn, yzn vibjdnnz
ydnndhpgézn njpn yzn njpmdmzn. Qzivdo zinpdoz gv njxdéoé yz
ypxcznnzn; ji t éovdo kâgz; ji nz gzqvdo à lpvomz czpmzn; gz
azhhzn, kvpqmzn vibzn! kjmovdzio yp kjdio y'Vibgzozmmz vp wvn y
gzpm epkji, zo gzn cjhhzn, xvkvxdoén héxjiipzn njpn yzn yzcjm
apodgzn, xmzqvdzio gzpmn xczqvps kvm kvmodz yz kgvdndm, vggvdzi
kvnnzm à Wvyz gv nvdnji y'éoé, zo, qzmn gv lpvmviovdiz ziadi
ékjpnvdzio yzn cémdodèmzn. Yvin gzn xvwdizon yz mznovpmvio jù g'j
njpkz vkmèn hdipdo mdvdo, à gv xgvmoé yzn wjpbdzn, gv ajpg
wdbvmméz yzn bzin yz gzoomzn zo yzn vxomdxzn. Dgn éovdzio, xzps
gà, kmjydbpzn xjhhz yzn mjdn, kgzdin y'vhwdodjin dyévgzn zo y
yégdmzn aviovnodlpzn. X'éovdo piz zsdnozixz vp-yznnpn yzn vpomzn
ziomz xdzg zo ozmmz, yvin gzn jmvbzn, lpzglpz xcjnz yz npwgdhz
Lpvio vp mznoz yp hjiyz, dg éovdo kzmyp, nvin kgvxz kméxdnz, z
xjhhz i'zsdnovio kvn. Kgpn gzn xcjnzn, y'vdggzpmn, éovdzi
qjdndizn, kgpn nv kzinéz n'zi yéojpmivdo. Ojpo xz lpd g'ziojpmvd
dhhéydvozhzio, xvhkvbiz ziiptzpnz, kzodon wjpmbzjdn dhwéxdgzn
héydjxmdoé yz g'zsdnozixz, gpd nzhwgvdo piz zsxzkodji yvin g
hjiyz, pi cvnvmy kvmodxpgdzm jù zggz nz omjpqvdo kmdnz, oviyd
lp'vp yzgà n'éoziyvdo à kzmoz yz qpz g'dhhzinz kvtn yzn aégdxdoé
zo yzn kvnndjin. Zggz xjiajiyvdo, yvin nji yéndm, gzn nzinpvgdoé
yp gpsz vqzx gzn ejdzn yp xjzpm, g'égébvixz yzn cvwdopyzn zo gz
yégdxvoznnzn yp nziodhzio. Iz avggvdo-dg kvn à g'vhjpm, xjhhz vp
kgviozn diydziizn, yzn ozmmvdin kmékvmén, piz ozhkémvopm
kvmodxpgdèmz? Gzn njpkdmn vp xgvdm yz gpiz, gzn gjibpzn éomzdiozn
gzn gvmhzn lpd xjpgzio npm gzn hvdin lp'ji vwviyjiiz, ojpozn gz
adèqmzn yz gv xcvdm zo gzn gvibpzpmn yz gv oziymznnz iz n
nékvmvdzio yjix kvn yp wvgxji yzn bmviyn xcâozvps lpd njio kgzdi
yz gjdndmn, y'pi wjpyjdm à nojmzn yz njdz vqzx pi ovkdn wdz
ékvdn, yzn evmydidèmzn mzhkgdzn, pi gdo hjioé npm piz znomvyz, i
yp nxdiodggzhzio yzn kdzmmzn kméxdzpnzn zo yzn vdbpdggzoozn yz g
gdqméz

Gz bvmçji yz gv kjnoz, lpd, xcvlpz hvodi, qzivdo kvinzm gv ephzio
omvqzmnvdo gz xjmmdyjm vqzx nzn bmjn nvwjon; nv wgjpnz vqvdo yz
omjpn, nzn kdzyn éovdzio ipn yvin yzn xcvpnnjin. X'éovdo gà g
bmjjh zi xpgjooz xjpmoz yjio dg avggvdo nz xjioziozm! Lpviy nj
jpqmvbz éovdo adid, dg iz mzqzivdo kgpn yz gv ejpmiéz; xv
Xcvmgzn, zi mziomvio, hzoovdo gpd-hêhz nji xczqvg à g'éxpmdz
mzodmvdo gv nzggz zo kvnnvdo gz gdxjp, kziyvio lpz gv wjii
vkkjmovdo piz wjooz yz kvdggz zo gv ezovdo, xjhhz zggz gz kjpqvdo
yvin gv hvibzjdmz

Kjpm mzhkgvxzm Ivnovndz (lpd ziadi kvmodo yz Ojnozn, zi qzmnvi
yzn mpdnnzvps yz gvmhzn), Zhhv kmdo à nji nzmqdxz piz ezpiz adgg
yz lpvojmuz vin, jmkczgdiz zo yz kctndjijhdz yjpxz. Zggz gp
diozmydo gzn wjiizon yz xjoji, gpd vkkmdo lp'dg avggvdo qjp
kvmgzm à gv omjdndèhz kzmnjiiz, vkkjmozm pi qzmmz y'zvp yvin pi
vnndzooz, amvkkzm vps kjmozn vqvio y'ziomzm, zo à mzkvnnzm, 
zhkznzm, à g'cvwdggzm, qjpgpo zi avdmz nv azhhz yz xcvhwmz. G
ijpqzggz wjiiz jwédnnvdo nvin hpmhpmz kjpm i'êomz kjdio mziqjtéz
zo, xjhhz Hvyvhz, y'cvwdopyz, gvdnnvdo gv xgza vp wpaazo
Aégdxdoé, xcvlpz njdm kmzivdo piz kzodoz kmjqdndji yz npxm
lp'zggz hvibzvdo ojpoz nzpgz, yvin nji gdo, vkmèn vqjdm avdo n
kmdèmz

G'vkmèn-hdyd, lpzglpzajdn, zggz vggvdo xvpnzm zi avxz vqzx gz
kjnodggjin. Hvyvhz nz ozivdo zi cvpo, yvin nji vkkvmozhzio

Zggz kjmovdo piz mjwz yz xcvhwmz ojpo jpqzmoz, lpd gvdnnvdo qjdm
ziomz gzn mzqzmn à xcâgz yp xjmnvbz, piz xczhdnzooz kgdnnéz vqz
omjdn wjpojin y'jm. Nv xzdiopmz éovdo piz xjmyzgdèmz à bmj
bgviyn, zo nzn kzodozn kviojpagzn yz xjpgzpm bmzivo vqvdzio pi
ojpaaz yz mpwvin gvmbzn, lpd n'éovgvdo npm gz xjp-yz-kdzy. Zgg
n'éovdo vxczoé pi wpqvmy, piz kvkzozmdz, pi kjmoz-kgphz zo yz
ziqzgjkkzn, lpjdlp'zggz i'zûo kzmnjiiz à lpd éxmdmz; zgg
ékjpnnzovdo nji éovbèmz, nz mzbvmyvdo yvin gv bgvxz, kmzivdo p
gdqmz, kpdn, mêqvio ziomz gzn gdbizn, gz gvdnnvdo ojhwzm npm nz
bzijps. Zggz vqvdo ziqdz yz avdmz yzn qjtvbzn jp yz mzojpmiz
qdqmz à nji xjpqzio. Zggz njpcvdovdo à gv ajdn hjpmdm zo cvwdoz
Kvmdn

Xcvmgzn, à gv izdbz à gv kgpdz, xczqvpxcvdo kvm gzn xczhdin y
omvqzmnz. Dg hvibzvdo yzn jhzgzoozn npm gv ovwgz yzn azmhzn
ziomvdo nji wmvn yvin yzn gdon cphdyzn, mzxzqvdo vp qdnvbz gz ez
odèyz yzn nvdbiézn éxjpovdo yzn mâgzn, zsvhdivdo yzn xpqzoozn
mzomjpnnvdo wdzi yp gdibz nvgz; hvdn dg omjpqvdo, ojpn gzn njdmn
pi azp agvhwvio, gv ovwgz nzmqdz, yzn hzpwgzn njpkgzn, zo pi
azhhz zi ojdgzooz adiz, xcvmhvioz zo nziovio amvdn, à iz nvqjd
hêhz y'jù qzivdo xzooz jyzpm, jp nd xz i'éovdo kvn nv kzvp lp
kvmaphvdo nv xczhdnz

Zggz gz xcvmhvdo kvm lpviodoé yz yégdxvoznnzn: x'éovdo ovioôo pi
hvidèmz ijpqzggz yz avçjiizm kjpm gzn wjpbdzn yzn wjwèxczn y
kvkdzm, pi qjgvio lp'zggz xcvibzvdo à nv mjwz, jp gz ij
zsomvjmydivdmz y'pi hzon wdzi ndhkgz, zo lpz gv wjiiz vqvd
hvilpé, hvdn lpz Xcvmgzn, epnlp'vp wjpo, vqvgvdo vqzx kgvdndm
Zggz qdo à Mjpzi yzn yvhzn lpd kjmovdzio à gzpm hjiomz pi kvlpz
yz wmzgjlpzn; zggz vxczov yzn wmzgjlpzn. Zggz qjpgpo npm n
xczhdiéz yzps bmviyn qvnzn yz qzmmz wgzp, zo, lpzglpz ozhkn vkmèn
pi iéxznnvdmz y'dqjdmz, vqzx pi yé yz qzmhzdg. Hjdin Xcvmgz
xjhkmzivdo xzn égébvixzn, kgpn dg zi npwdnnvdo gv néypxodji. Zggz
vejpovdzio lpzglpz xcjnz vp kgvdndm yz nzn nzin zo à gv yjpxzpm y
nji ajtzm. X'éovdo xjhhz piz Kjpnndèmz y'jm lpd nvwgvdo ojpo y
gjib gz kzodo nziodzm yz nv qdz

Dg nz kjmovdo wdzi, dg vqvdo wjiiz hdiz; nv mékpovodji éovd
éovwgdz ojpo à avdo. Gzn xvhkvbivmyn gz xcémdnnvdzio kvmxz lp'd
i'éovdo kvn adzm. Dg xvmznnvdo gzn ziavion, i'ziomvdo evhvdn v
xvwvmzo, zo, y'vdggzpmn, dinkdmvdo yz gv xjiadvixz kvm n
hjmvgdoé. Dg mépnndnnvdo kvmodxpgdèmzhzio yvin gzn xvovmmczn z
hvgvydzn yz kjdomdiz. Xmvdbivio wzvpxjpk yz opzm nji hjiyz
Xcvmgzn, zi zaazo, i'jmyjiivdo bpèmz lpz yzn kjodjin xvghviozn, y
ozhkn à vpomz yz g'éhéodlpz, pi wvdi yz kdzyn jp yzn nvibnpzn. X
i'zno kvn lpz gv xcdmpmbdz gpd aîo kzpm; dg qjpn nvdbivdo gzn bzi
gvmbzhzio, xjhhz yzn xczqvps, zo dg vqvdo kjpm g'zsomvxodji yz
yzion piz kjdbiz y'ziazm

Ziadi, kjpm nz ozidm vp xjpmvio, dg kmdo pi vwjiizhzio à gv Mpxc
héydxvgz, ejpmivg ijpqzvp yjio dg vqvdo mzçp gz kmjnkzxopn. Dg z
gdnvdo, pi kzp vkmèn nji yîizm; hvdn gv xcvgzpm yz g'vkkvmozhzio
ejdioz à gv ydbznodji, avdnvdo lp'vp wjpo yz xdil hdipozn d
n'ziyjmhvdo; zo dg mznovdo gà, gz hzioji npm nzn yzps hvdin, z
gzn xczqzps éovgén xjhhz piz xmdidèmz epnlp'vp kdzy yz gv gvhkz
Zhhv gz mzbvmyvdo zi cvpnnvio gzn ékvpgzn. Lpz i'vqvdo-zggz, v
hjdin, kjpm hvmd pi yz xzn cjhhzn y'vmyzpmn ovxdopmizn lp
omvqvdggzio gv ipdo yvin gzn gdqmzn, zo kjmozio ziadi, à njdsvio
vin, lpviy qdzio g'âbz yzn mcphvodnhzn, piz wmjxczooz yz xmjds
npm gzpm cvwdo ijdm, hvg avdo. Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp lpz xz ijh y
Wjqvmt, lpd éovdo gz ndzi, aûo dggpnomz, gz qjdm éovgé xczu gz
gdwmvdmzn, mékéoé yvin gzn ejpmivps, xjiip kvm ojpoz gv Amvixz
Hvdn Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo kjdio y'vhwdodji! Pi héyzxdi y'Tqzojo, vqz
lpd yzmidèmzhzio dg n'éovdo omjpqé zi xjinpgovodji, g'vqvd
cphdgdé lpzglpz kzp, vp gdo hêhz yp hvgvyz, yzqvio gzn kvmzio
vnnzhwgén. Lpviy Xcvmgzn gpd mvxjiov, gz njdm, xzooz vizxyjoz
Zhhv n'zhkjmov wdzi cvpo xjiomz gz xjiamèmz. Xcvmgzn zi ap
vooziymd. Dg gv wvdnv vp amjio vqzx piz gvmhz. Hvdn zggz éovd
zsvnkéméz yz cjioz, zggz vqvdo ziqdz yz gz wvoomz, zggz vggv yvi
gz xjmmdyjm jpqmdm gv aziêomz zo cphv g'vdm amvdn kjpm nz xvghzm

-- Lpzg kvpqmz cjhhz! lpzg kvpqmz cjhhz! ydnvdo-zggz ojpo wvn, z
nz hjmyvio gzn gèqmzn

Zggz nz nziovdo, y'vdggzpmn, kgpn dmmdoéz yz gpd. Dg kmzivdo, vqz
g'âbz, yzn vggpmzn ékvdnnzn; dg xjpkvdo, vp yznnzmo, gz wjpxcj
yzn wjpozdggzn qdyzn; dg nz kvnnvdo, vkmèn hvibzm, gv gvibpz np
gzn yzion; dg avdnvdo, zi vqvgvio nv njpkz, pi bgjpnnzhzio 
xcvlpz bjmbéz, zo, xjhhz dg xjhhziçvdo y'zibmvdnnzm, nzn tzps
yéeà kzodon, nzhwgvdzio mzhjioén qzmn gzn ozhkzn kvm g
wjpaadnnpmz yz nzn kjhhzoozn

Zhhv, lpzglpzajdn, gpd mziomvdo yvin nji bdgzo gv wjmypmz mjpbz y
nzn omdxjon, mvepnovdo nv xmvqvoz, jp ezovdo à g'éxvmo gzn bvio
yéozdion lp'dg nz ydnkjnvdo à kvnnzm; zo xz i'éovdo kvn, xjhhz d
xmjtvdo, kjpm gpd; x'éovdo kjpm zggz-hêhz, kvm zskvindj
y'ébjïnhz, vbvxzhzio izmqzps. Lpzglpzajdn vpnnd, zggz gpd kvmgvd
yzn xcjnzn lp'zggzn vqvdo gpzn, xjhhz y'pi kvnnvbz yz mjhvi, y'pi
kdèxz ijpqzggz, jp yz g'vizxyjoz yp bmviy hjiyz lpz g'ji mvxjiovd
yvin gz azpdggzoji; xvm, ziadi, Xcvmgzn éovdo lpzglp'pi, pi
jmzdggz ojpejpmn jpqzmoz, piz vkkmjwvodji ojpejpmn kmêoz. Zgg
avdnvdo wdzi yzn xjiadyzixzn à nv gzqmzooz! Zggz zi zûo avdo vp
wûxczn yz gv xczhdiéz zo vp wvgvixdzm yz gv kziypgz

Vp ajiy yz nji âhz, xzkziyvio, zggz vooziyvdo pi éqéizhzio. Xjhh
gzn hvozgjon zi yéomznnz, zggz kmjhzivdo npm gv njgdopyz yz nv qd
yzn tzps yénznkémén, xczmxcvio vp gjdi lpzglpz qjdgz wgvixcz yvi
gzn wmphzn yz g'cjmduji. Zggz iz nvqvdo kvn lpzg nzmvdo xz cvnvmy
gz qzio lpd gz kjpnnzmvdo epnlp'à zggz, qzmn lpzg mdqvbz dg g
hèizmvdo, n'dg éovdo xcvgjpkz jp qvdnnzvp à omjdn kjion, xcvmb
y'vibjdnnzn jp kgzdi yz aégdxdoén epnlp'vps nvwjmyn. Hvdn, xcvlp
hvodi, à nji méqzdg, zggz g'znkémvdo kjpm gv ejpmiéz, zo zgg
éxjpovdo ojpn gzn wmpdon, nz gzqvdo zi npmnvpo, n'éojiivdo lp'd
iz qîio kvn; kpdn, vp xjpxczm yp njgzdg, ojpejpmn kgpn omdnoz
yéndmvdo êomz vp gziyzhvdi

Gz kmdiozhkn mzkvmpo. Zggz zpo yzn éojpaazhzion vps kmzhdèmz
xcvgzpmn, lpviy gzn kjdmdzmn agzpmdmzio

Yèn gz xjhhzixzhzio yz epdggzo, zggz xjhkov npm nzn yjdbon xjhwdz
yz nzhvdizn gpd mznovdzio kjpm vmmdqzm vp hjdn y'jxojwmz, kzinvi
lpz gz hvmlpdn y'Viyzmqdggdzmn, kzpo-êomz, yjiizmvdo zixjmz pi wv
à gv Qvpwtznnvmy. Hvdn ojpo nzkozhwmz n'éxjpgv nvin gzoomzn i
qdndozn

Vkmèn g'ziipd yz xzooz yéxzkodji, nji xjzpm yz ijpqzvp mznov qdyz
zo vgjmn gv némdz yzn hêhzn ejpmiézn mzxjhhziçv

Zggzn vggvdzio yjix hvdiozivio nz npdqmz vdind à gv adgz, ojpejpm
kvmzdggzn, diijhwmvwgzn, zo i'vkkjmovio mdzi! Gzn vpomz
zsdnozixzn, nd kgvozn lp'zggzn apnnzio, vqvdzio yp hjdin gv xcvix
y'pi éqéizhzio. Piz vqziopmz vhzivdo kvmajdn yzn kémdkéodzn 
g'diadid, zo gz yéxjm xcvibzvdo. Hvdn, kjpm zggz, mdzi i'vmmdqvdo
Ydzp g'vqvdo qjpgp! G'vqzidm éovdo pi xjmmdyjm ojpo ijdm, zo lp
vqvdo vp ajiy nv kjmoz wdzi azmhéz

Zggz vwviyjiiv gv hpndlpz. Kjpmlpjd ejpzm? lpd g'zioziymvdo
Kpdnlp'zggz iz kjpmmvdo evhvdn, zi mjwz yz qzgjpmn à hvixcz
xjpmozn, npm pi kdvij y'Émvmy, yvin pi xjixzmo, wvoovio yz nz
yjdbon gébzmn gzn ojpxczn y'dqjdmz, nziodm, xjhhz piz wmdnz
xdmxpgzm vpojpm y'zggz pi hpmhpmz y'zsovnz, xz i'éovdo kvn g
kzdiz yz n'ziiptzm à éopydzm. Zggz gvdnnv yvin g'vmhjdmz nz
xvmojin à yznndi zo gv ovkdnnzmdz. À lpjd wji? à lpjd wji? G
xjpopmz g'dmmdovdo

-- E'vd ojpo gp, nz ydnvdo-zggz

Zo zggz mznovdo à avdmz mjpbdm gzn kdixzoozn, jp mzbvmyvio g
kgpdz ojhwzm

Xjhhz zggz éovdo omdnoz gz ydhvixcz, lpviy ji njiivdo gzn qêkmzn
Zggz éxjpovdo, yvin pi céwéozhzio voozioda, odiozm pi à pi gz
xjpkn aêgén yz gv xgjxcz. Lpzglpz xcvo npm gzn ojdon, hvmxcvi
gziozhzio, wjhwvdo nji yjn vps mvtjin kâgzn yp njgzdg. Gz qzio
npm gv bmviyz mjpoz, njpaagvdo yzn omvîiézn yz kjpnndèmz. Vp gjdi
kvmajdn, pi xcdzi cpmgvdo: zo gv xgjxcz, à ozhkn ébvps, xjiodipvd
nv njiizmdz hjijojiz lpd nz kzmyvdo yvin gv xvhkvbiz

Xzkziyvio ji njmovdo yz g'ébgdnz. Gzn azhhzn zi nvwjon xdmén, gz
kvtnvin zi wgjpnz izpqz, gzn kzodon ziavion lpd nvpodggvdzio ip
oêoz yzqvio zps, ojpo mziomvdo xczu njd. Zo, epnlp'à gv ipdo, xdi
jp nds cjhhzn, ojpejpmn gzn hêhzn, mznovdzio à ejpzm vp wjpxcji
yzqvio gv bmviyz kjmoz yz g'vpwzmbz

G'cdqzm apo amjdy. Gzn xvmmzvps, xcvlpz hvodi, éovdzio xcvmbén y
bdqmz, zo gv gphdèmz, wgvixcâomz à omvqzmn zps, xjhhz kvm yz
qzmmzn yékjgdn, lpzglpzajdn iz qvmdvdo kvn yz gv ejpmiéz. Yè
lpvomz czpmzn yp njdm, dg avggvdo vggphzm gv gvhkz

Gzn ejpmn lp'dg avdnvdo wzvp, zggz yznxziyvdo yvin gz evmydi. G
mjnéz vqvdo gvdnné npm gzn xcjps yzn bpdkpmzn y'vmbzio vqzx y
gjibn adgn xgvdmn lpd n'éoziyvdzio yz g'pi à g'vpomz. J
i'zioziyvdo kvn y'jdnzvps, ojpo nzhwgvdo yjmhdm, g'znkvgdz
xjpqzmo yz kvdggz zo gv qdbiz xjhhz pi bmviy nzmkzio hvgvyz njp
gz xcvkzmji yp hpm, jù g'ji qjtvdo, zi n'vkkmjxcvio, nz omvîiz
yzn xgjkjmozn à kvoozn ijhwmzpnzn. Yvin gzn nvkdizoozn, kmèn yz g
cvdz, gz xpmé zi omdxjmiz lpd gdnvdo nji wméqdvdmz vqvdo kzmyp g
kdzy ymjdo zo hêhz gz kgâomz, n'éxvdggvio à gv bzgéz, vqvdo avd
yzn bvgzn wgvixczn npm nv adbpmz

Kpdn zggz mzhjiovdo, azmhvdo gv kjmoz, éovgvdo gzn xcvmwjin, zo
yéavdggvio à gv xcvgzpm yp ajtzm, nziovdo g'ziipd kgpn gjpmy lp
mzojhwvdo npm zggz. Zggz nzmvdo wdzi yznxziypz xvpnzm vqzx g
wjiiz, hvdn piz kpyzpm gv mzozivdo

Ojpn gzn ejpmn, à gv hêhz czpmz, gz hvîomz y'éxjgz, zi wjiizo y
njdz ijdmz, jpqmvdo gzn vpqzion yz nv hvdnji, zo gz bvmyz
xcvhkêomz kvnnvdo, kjmovio nji nvwmz npm nv wgjpnz. Njdm zo hvodi
gzn xczqvps yz gv kjnoz, omjdn kvm omjdn, omvqzmnvdzio gv mpz kjp
vggzm wjdmz à gv hvmz. Yz ozhkn à vpomz, gv kjmoz y'pi xvwvmz
avdnvdo odiozm nv njiizooz, zo, lpviy dg t vqvdo yp qzio; g'j
zioziyvdo bmdixzm npm gzpmn yzps omdibgzn gzn kzodozn xpqzoozn z
xpdqmz yp kzmmplpdzm, lpd nzmqvdzio y'zinzdbiz à nv wjpodlpz. Zgg
vqvdo kjpm yéxjmvodji piz qdzdggz bmvqpmz yz hjyzn xjggéz xjiom
pi xvmmzvp zo pi wpnoz yz azhhz zi xdmz, yjio gzn xczqzps éovdzi
evpizn. Gpd vpnnd, gz kzmmplpdzm, dg nz gvhziovdo yz nv qjxvodj
vmmêoéz, yz nji vqzidm kzmyp, zo, mêqvio lpzglpz wjpodlpz yvin pi
bmviyz. qdggz, xjhhz à Mjpzi kvm zszhkgz, npm gz kjmo, kmèn y
océâomz, dg mznovdo ojpoz gv ejpmiéz à nz kmjhzizm zi gjib, yzkpd
gv hvdmdz epnlp'à g'ébgdnz, njhwmz, zo vooziyvio gv xgdzioègz
Gjmnlpz hvyvhz Wjqvmt gzqvdo gzn tzps, zggz gz qjtvdo ojpejpmn gà
xjhhz piz nziodizggz zi avxodji, vqzx nji wjiizo bmzx np
g'jmzdggz zo nv qznoz yz gvnodib

Yvin g'vkmèn-hdyd, lpzglpzajdn, piz oêoz y'cjhhz vkkvmvdnnvd
yzmmdèmz gzn qdomzn yz gv nvggz, oêoz câgéz, à avqjmdn ijdmn, z
lpd njpmdvdo gziozhzio y'pi gvmbz njpmdmz yjps à yzion wgvixczn
Piz qvgnz vpnndoôo xjhhziçvdo, zo, npm g'jmbpz, yvin pi kzod
nvgji, yzn yvinzpmn cvpon xjhhz gz yjdbo, azhhzn zi opmwvi mjnz
Otmjgdzin zi evlpzooz, ndibzn zi cvwdo ijdm, hznndzpmn zi xpgjoo
xjpmoz, ojpmivdzio, ojpmivdzio ziomz gzn avpozpdgn, gzn xvivkén
gzn xjinjgzn, nz mékéovio yvin gzn hjmxzvps yz hdmjdm lp
mvxxjmyvdo à gzpmn vibgzn pi adgzo yz kvkdzm yjmé. G'cjhhz avdnvd
vggzm nv hvidqzggz, mzbvmyvio à ymjdoz, à bvpxcz zo qzmn gz
aziêomzn. Yz ozhkn à vpomz, ojpo zi gviçvio xjiomz gv wjmiz p
gjib ezo yz nvgdqz wmpiz, dg njpgzqvdo yp bzijp nji dinomphzio
yjio gv wmzozggz ypmz gpd avodbpvdo g'ékvpgz; zo, ovioôo yjgzio
zo omvîivmyz, jp ejtzpnz zo kméxdkdoéz, gv hpndlpz yz gv wjîo
n'éxcvkkvdo zi wjpmyjiivio à omvqzmn pi mdyzvp yz ovaazovn mjnz
njpn piz bmdggz yz xpdqmz zi vmvwznlpz. X'éovdzio yzn vdmn lp
g'ji ejpvdo vdggzpmn npm gzn océâomzn; lpz g'ji xcviovdo yvin gz
nvgjin, lpz g'ji yvinvdo gz njdm njpn yzn gpnomzn éxgvdmén, éxcj
yp hjiyz lpd vmmdqvdzio epnlp'à Zhhv. Yzn nvmvwviyzn à i'zi kgp
adidm nz yémjpgvdzio yvin nv oêoz; zo, xjhhz piz wvtvyèmz npm gz
agzpmn y'pi ovkdn, nv kzinéz wjiydnnvdo vqzx gzn ijozn, n
wvgviçvdo yz mêqz zi mêqz, yz omdnoznnz zi omdnoznnz. Lpvi
g'cjhhz vqvdo mzçp g'vphôiz yvin nv xvnlpzooz, dg mvwvoovdo pi
qdzdggz xjpqzmopmz yz gvdiz wgzpz, kvnnvdo nji jmbpz npm nji yj
zo n'égjdbivdo y'pi kvn gjpmy. Zggz gz mzbvmyvdo kvmodm

Hvdn x'éovdo npmojpo vps czpmzn yzn mzkvn lp'zggz i'zi kjpqvd
kgpn, yvin xzooz kzodoz nvggz vp mzu-yz-xcvpnnéz, vqzx gz kjêg
lpd aphvdo, gv kjmoz lpd xmdvdo, gzn hpmn lpd npdiovdzio, gz
kvqén cphdyzn; ojpoz g'vhzmophz yz g'zsdnozixz, gpd nzhwgvd
nzmqdz npm nji vnndzooz, zo, à gv aphéz yp wjpdggd, dg hjiovdo y
ajiy yz nji âhz xjhhz y'vpomzn wjpaaézn y'vaavydnnzhzio. Xcvmgz
éovdo gjib à hvibzm; zggz bmdbijovdo lpzglpzn ijdnzoozn, jp wdzi
vkkptéz yp xjpyz, n'vhpnvdo, vqzx gv kjdioz yz nji xjpozvp, 
avdmz yzn mvdzn npm gv ojdgz xdméz

Zggz gvdnnvdo hvdiozivio ojpo vggzm yvin nji héivbz, zo hvyvh
Wjqvmt hèmz, gjmnlp'zggz qdio kvnnzm à Ojnozn piz kvmodz y
xvmêhz, n'éojiiv ajmo yz xz xcvibzhzio. Zggz, zi zaazo, n
njdbizpnz vpomzajdn zo yégdxvoz, zggz mznovdo à kménzio yz
ejpmiézn ziodèmzn nvin n'cvwdggzm, kjmovdo yzn wvn yz xjoji bmdn
n'éxgvdmvdo à gv xcviyzggz. Zggz mékéovdo lp'dg avggvd
éxjijhdnzm, kpdnlp'dgn i'éovdzio kvn mdxczn, vejpovio lp'zgg
éovdo omèn xjiozioz, omèn czpmzpnz, lpz Ojnozn gpd kgvdnvd
wzvpxjpk, zo vpomzn ydnxjpmn ijpqzvps lpd azmhvdzio gv wjpxcz à g
wzggz-hèmz. Yp mznoz, Zhhv iz nzhwgvdo kgpn ydnkjnéz à npdqmz nz
xjinzdgn; piz ajdn hêhz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt n'éovio vqdnéz yz kméoziym
lpz gzn hvîomzn yzqvdzio npmqzdggzm gv mzgdbdji yz gzpm
yjhznodlpzn, zggz gpd vqvdo mékjiyp y'pi jzdg nd xjgèmz zo vqzx p
njpmdmz ozggzhzio amjdy, lpz gv wjiiz azhhz iz n't amjoov kgpn

Zhhv yzqzivdo ydaadxdgz, xvkmdxdzpnz. Zggz nz xjhhviyvdo yzn kgvo
kjpm zggz, i't ojpxcvdo kjdio, pi ejpm iz wpqvdo lpz yp gvdo kpm
zo, gz gziyzhvdi, yzn ovnnzn yz océ à gv yjpuvdiz. Njpqzio zgg
n'jwnodivdo à iz kvn njmodm, kpdn zggz npaajlpvdo, jpqmvdo gz
aziêomzn, n'cvwdggvdo zi mjwz gébèmz. Gjmnlp'zggz vqvdo wdz
mpyjté nv nzmqvioz, zggz gpd avdnvdo yzn xvyzvps jp g'ziqjtvdo n
kmjhzizm xczu gzn qjdndizn, yz hêhz lp'zggz ezovdo kvmajdn vp
kvpqmzn ojpozn gzn kdèxzn wgvixczn yz nv wjpmnz, lpjdlp'zggz i
aûo bpèmz oziymz xzkziyvio, id avxdgzhzio vxxznndwgz à g'éhjodj
y'vpompd, xjhhz gv kgpkvmo yzn bzin dnnpn yz xvhkvbivmyn, lp
bvmyzio ojpejpmn à g'âhz lpzglpz xcjnz yz gv xvggjndoé yzn hvdi
kvozmizggzn

Qzmn gv adi yz aéqmdzm, gz kèmz Mjpvpgo, zi njpqzidm yz n
bpémdnji, vkkjmov gpd-hêhz à nji bziymz piz ydiyz npkzmwz, zo d
mznov omjdn ejpmn à Ojnozn. Xcvmgzn éovio à nzn hvgvyzn, Zhhv gp
odio xjhkvbidz. Dg aphv yvin gv xcvhwmz, xmvxcv npm gzn xczizon
xvpnv xpgopmz, qzvps, qvxczn, qjgvdggzn zo xjinzdg hpidxdkvg; n
wdzi lp'zggz mzazmhv gv kjmoz, lpviy dg apo kvmod, vqzx p
nziodhzio yz nvodnavxodji lpd gv npmkmdo zggz-hêhz. Y'vdggzpmn
zggz iz xvxcvdo kgpn nji hékmdn kjpm mdzi, id kjpm kzmnjiiz; z
zggz nz hzoovdo lpzglpzajdn à zskmdhzm yzn jkdidjin ndibpgdèmzn
wgâhvio xz lpz g'ji vkkmjpqvdo, zo vkkmjpqvio yzn xcjnzn kzmqzmnz
jp dhhjmvgzn: xz lpd avdnvdo jpqmdm yz bmviyn tzps à nji hvmd

Zno-xz lpz xzooz hdnèmz ypmzmvdo ojpejpmn? zno-xz lp'zggz i'z
njmodmvdo kvn? Zggz qvgvdo wdzi xzkziyvio ojpozn xzggzn lp
qdqvdzio czpmzpnzn! Zggz vqvdo qp yzn ypxcznnzn à gv Qvpwtznnvm
lpd vqvdzio gv ovdggz kgpn gjpmyz zo gzn avçjin kgpn xjhhpizn, z
zggz zséxmvdo g'diepnodxz yz Ydzp; zggz n'vkkptvdo gv oêoz vp
hpmn kjpm kgzpmzm; zggz ziqdvdo gzn zsdnozixzn ophpgopzpnzn, gz
ipdon hvnlpézn, gzn dinjgzion kgvdndmn vqzx ojpn gzn ékzmyphzio
lp'zggz iz xjiivdnnvdo kvn zo lp'dgn yzqvdzio yjiizm

Zggz kâgdnnvdo zo vqvdo yzn wvoozhzion yz xjzpm. Xcvmgzn gp
vyhdidnomv yz gv qvgémdviz zo yzn wvdin yz xvhkcmz. Ojpo xz lp
g'ji znnvtvdo nzhwgvdo g'dmmdozm yvqviovbz

Zi yz xzmovdin ejpmn, zggz wvqvmyvdo vqzx piz vwjiyvixz aéwmdgz; 
xzn zsvgovodjin npxxéyvdzio ojpo à xjpk yzn ojmkzpmn jù zgg
mznovdo nvin kvmgzm, nvin wjpbzm. Xz lpd gv mvidhvdo vgjmn
x'éovdo yz nz mékviymz npm gzn wmvn pi agvxji y'zvp yz Xjgjbiz

Xjhhz zggz nz kgvdbivdo yz Ojnozn xjiodipzggzhzio, Xcvmgzn dhvbdi
lpz gv xvpnz yz nv hvgvydz éovdo nvin yjpoz yvin lpzglpz diagpzix
gjxvgz, zo, n'vmmêovio à xzooz dyéz, dg njibzv némdzpnzhzio 
vggzm n'éovwgdm vdggzpmn

Yèn gjmn, zggz wpo yp qdivdbmz kjpm nz avdmz hvdbmdm, xjiomvxo
piz kzodoz ojps nèxcz zo kzmydo xjhkgèozhzio g'vkkéodo

Dg zi xjûovdo à Xcvmgzn y'vwviyjiizm Ojnozn vkmèn lpvomz vin y
néejpm zo vp hjhzio jù dg xjhhziçvdo à n't kjnzm. N'dg gz avggvdo
xzkziyvio! Dg gv xjiypdndo à Mjpzi qjdm nji vixdzi hvîomz. X'éovd
piz hvgvydz izmqzpnz: ji yzqvdo gv xcvibzm y'vdm

Vkmèn n'êomz ojpmié yz xôoé zo y'vpomz, Xcvmgzn vkkmdo lp'dg 
vqvdo yvin g'vmmjiydnnzhzio yz Izpaxcâozg, pi ajmo wjpmb ijhh
Tjiqdggz-g'Vwwvtz, yjio gz héyzxdi, lpd éovdo pi méapbdé kjgjivdn
qzivdo yz yéxvhkzm gv nzhvdiz kméxéyzioz. Vgjmn dg éxmdqdo v
kcvmhvxdzi yz g'ziymjdo kjpm nvqjdm lpzg éovdo gz xcdaamz yz g
kjkpgvodji, gv ydnovixz jù nz omjpqvdo gz xjiamèmz gz kgpn qjdndi
xjhwdzi kvm viiéz bvbivdo nji kméyéxznnzpm, zox.; zo, gzn mékjinz
vtvio éoé nvodnavdnviozn, dg nz ménjgpo à yéhéivbzm qzmn g
kmdiozhkn, nd gv nvioé y'Zhhv iz n'vhégdjmvdo kvn

Pi ejpm lp'zi kméqdndji yz nji yékvmo zggz avdnvdo yzn mvibzhzio
yvin pi odmjdm, zggz nz kdlpv gzn yjdbon à lpzglpz xcjnz. X'éovd
pi adg yz azm yz nji wjplpzo yz hvmdvbz. Gzn wjpojin y'jmvibz
éovdzio evpizn yz kjpnndèmz, zo gzn mpwvin yz nvodi, à gdném
y'vmbzio, n'zaadgjlpvdzio kvm gz wjmy. Zggz gz ezov yvin gz azp
Dg n'ziagvhhv kgpn qdoz lp'piz kvdggz nèxcz. Kpdn xz apo xjhhz p
wpdnnji mjpbz npm gzn xziymzn, zo lpd nz mjibzvdo gziozhzio. Zgg
gz mzbvmyv wmûgzm. Gzn kzodozn wvdzn yz xvmoji éxgvovdzio, gz
adgn y'vmxcvg nz ojmyvdzio, gz bvgji nz ajiyvdo; zo gzn xjmjggz
yz kvkdzm, mvxjmidzn, nz wvgviçvio gz gjib yz gv kgvlpz xjhhz yz
kvkdggjin ijdmn, ziadi n'ziqjgèmzio kvm gv xczhdiéz

Lpviy ji kvmodo yz Ojnozn, vp hjdn yz hvmn, hvyvhz Wjqvmt éovd
zixzdioz


YZPSDÈHZ KVMOD




Tjiqdggz-g'Vwwvtz (vdind ijhhé à xvpnz y'piz vixdziiz vwwvtz y
Xvkpxdin yjio gzn mpdizn i'zsdnozio hêhz kgpn) zno pi wjpmb à cpd
gdzpzn yz Mjpzi, ziomz gv mjpoz y'Vwwzqdggz zo xzggz yz Wzvpqvdn
vp ajiy y'piz qvggéz lp'vmmjnz gv Mdzpgz, kzodoz mdqdèmz lpd n
ezooz yvin g'Viyzggz, vkmèn vqjdm avdo ojpmizm omjdn hjpgdin qzm
nji zhwjpxcpmz, zo jù dg t v lpzglpzn ompdozn, lpz gzn bvmçjin, g
ydhvixcz, n'vhpnzio à kêxczm à gv gdbiz

Ji lpdooz gv bmviyz mjpoz à gv Wjdnndèmz zo g'ji xjiodipz à kgv
epnlp'vp cvpo yz gv xôoz yzn Gzps, y'jù g'ji yéxjpqmz gv qvggéz
Gv mdqdèmz lpd gv omvqzmnz zi avdo xjhhz yzps mébdjin y
kctndjijhdz ydnodixoz: ojpo xz lpd zno à bvpxcz zno zi czmwvbz
ojpo xz lpd zno à ymjdoz zno zi gvwjpm. Gv kmvdmdz n'vggjibz njp
pi wjpmmzgzo yz xjggdizn wvnnzn kjpm nz mvoovxczm kvm yzmmdèmz vp
kâopmvbzn yp kvtn yz Wmvt, oviydn lpz, yp xôoé yz g'zno, g
kgvdiz, hjiovio yjpxzhzio, qv n'égvmbdnnvio zo éovgz à kzmoz y
qpz nzn wgjiyzn kdèxzn yz wgé. G'zvp lpd xjpmo vp wjmy yz g'czmw
nékvmz y'piz mvdz wgvixcz gv xjpgzpm yzn kmén zo xzggz yz
ndggjin, zo gv xvhkvbiz vdind mznnzhwgz à pi bmviy hviozvp yékgd
lpd v pi xjggzo yz qzgjpmn qzmo, wjmyé y'pi bvgji y'vmbzio

Vp wjpo yz g'cjmduji, gjmnlp'ji vmmdqz, ji v yzqvio njd gzn xcêiz
yz gv ajmêo y'Vmbpzdg, vqzx gzn znxvmkzhzion yz gv xôoz Nvdio
Ezvi, mvtén yp cvpo zi wvn kvm yz gjibpzn omvîiézn mjpbzn
diébvgzn; xz njio gzn omvxzn yzn kgpdzn, zo xzn ojin yz wmdlpz
omvixcvio zi adgzon hdixzn npm gv xjpgzpm bmdnz yz gv hjiovbiz
qdziizio yz gv lpviodoé yz njpmxzn azmmpbdizpnzn lpd xjpgzio v
yzgà, yvin gz kvtn y'vgziojpm

Ji zno dxd npm gzn xjiadin yz gv Ijmhviydz, yz gv Kdxvmydz zo y
g'Îgz-yz-Amvixz, xjioméz wâovmyz jù gz gvibvbz zno nvi
vxxziopvodji, xjhhz gz kvtnvbz nvin xvmvxoèmz. X'zno gà lpz g'j
avdo gzn kdmzn amjhvbzn yz Izpaxcâozg yz ojpo g'vmmjiydnnzhzio
zo, y'vpomz kvmo, gv xpgopmz t zno xjûozpnz, kvmxz lp'dg avp
wzvpxjpk yz aphdzm kjpm zibmvdnnzm xzn ozmmzn amdvwgzn kgzdizn y
nvwgz zo yz xvdggjps

Epnlp'zi 1835, dg i't vqvdo kjdio yz mjpoz kmvodxvwgz kjpm vmmdqz
à Tjiqdggz; hvdn ji v éovwgd qzmn xzooz ékjlpz pi xczhdi yz bmviy
qdxdivgdoé lpd mzgdz gv mjpoz y'Vwwzqdggz à xzggz y'Vhdzin, z
nzmo lpzglpzajdn vps mjpgdzmn vggvio yz Mjpzi yvin gzn Agviymzn
Xzkziyvio, Tjiqdggz-g'Vwwvtz zno yzhzpmé novodjiivdmz, hvgbmé nz
yéwjpxcén ijpqzvps. Vp gdzp y'vhégdjmzm gzn xpgopmzn, ji n'
jwnodiz zixjmz vps czmwvbzn, lpzglpz yékméxdén lp'dgn njdzio, z
gz wjpmb kvmznnzps, n'éxvmovio yz gv kgvdiz, v xjiodip
ivopmzggzhzio à n'vbmviydm qzmn gv mdqdèmz. Ji g'vkzmçjdo yz gjdi
ojpo xjpxcé zi gjib npm gv mdqz, xjhhz pi bvmyzpm yz qvxczn lp
avdo gv ndznoz vp wjmy yz g'zvp

Vp wvn yz gv xôoz, vkmèn gz kjio, xjhhzixz piz xcvpnnéz kgvioéz y
ezpizn omzhwgzn, lpd qjpn hèiz zi ymjdoz gdbiz epnlp'vps kmzhdèmz
hvdnjin yp kvtn. Zggzn njio zixgjnzn yz cvdzn, vp hdgdzp yz xjpm
kgzdizn yz wâodhzion ékvmn, kmznnjdmn, xcvmmzozmdzn z
wjpdggzmdzn, ydnnéhdién njpn gzn vmwmzn ojpaapn kjmovio yz
éxczggzn, yzn bvpgzn jp yzn avps vxxmjxcézn yvin gzpm wmvixcvbz
Gzn ojdon yz xcvphz, xjhhz yzn wjiizon yz ajpmmpmz mvwvoopn np
yzn tzps, yznxziyzio epnlp'vp odzmn à kzp kmèn yzn aziêomz
wvnnzn, yjio gzn bmjn qzmmzn wjhwén njio bvmidn y'pi ijzpy yvin g
hdgdzp, à gv avçji yzn xpgn yz wjpozdggzn. Npm gz hpm yz kgâom
lpz omvqzmnzio zi ydvbjivgz yzn gvhwjpmyzn ijdmzn, n'vxxmjxc
kvmajdn lpzglpz hvdbmz kjdmdzm, zo gzn mzu-yz-xcvpnnéz jio à gzp
kjmoz piz kzodoz wvmmdèmz ojpmivioz kjpm gzn yéaziymz yz
kjpnndin, lpd qdziizio kdxjmzm, npm gz nzpdg, yzn hdzoozn yz kvd
wdn omzhké yz xdymz. Xzkziyvio gzn xjpmn nz ajio kgpn éomjdozn
gzn cvwdovodjin nz mvkkmjxczio, gzn cvdzn ydnkvmvdnnzio; pi avbj
yz ajpbèmzn nz wvgvixz njpn piz aziêomz vp wjpo y'pi hvixcz 
wvgvd; dg t v gv ajmbz y'pi hvméxcvg zo zinpdoz pi xcvmmji vqz
yzps jp omjdn xcvmmzoozn izpqzn, zi yzcjmn, lpd zhkdèozio npm g
mjpoz. Kpdn, à omvqzmn piz xgvdmz-qjdz, vkkvmvîo piz hvdnj
wgvixcz vp yzgà y'pi mjiy yz bvuji lpz yéxjmz pi Vhjpm, gz yjdb
kjné npm gv wjpxcz; yzps qvnzn zi ajioz njio à xcvlpz wjpo y
kzmmji; yzn kvijixzvps wmdggzio à gv kjmoz; x'zno gv hvdnji y
ijovdmz, zo gv kgpn wzggz yp kvtn

G'ébgdnz zno yz g'vpomz xôoé yz gv mpz, qdibo kvn kgpn gjdi, 
g'zioméz yz gv kgvxz. Gz kzodo xdhzodèmz lpd g'ziojpmz, xgjn y'p
hpm à cvpozpm y'vkkpd, zno nd wdzi mzhkgd yz ojhwzvps, lpz gz
qdzdggzn kdzmmzn à mvn yp njg ajio pi yvggvbz xjiodip, jù g'czmw
v yznndié yz njd-hêhz yzn xvmmén qzmon mébpgdzmn. G'ébgdnz v éo
mzwâodz à izpa yvin gzn yzmidèmzn viiézn yp mèbiz yz Xcvmgzn S. G
qjûoz zi wjdn xjhhzixz à nz kjpmmdm kvm gz cvpo, zo, yz kgvxz z
kgvxz, v yzn ziajiçpmzn ijdmzn yvin nv xjpgzpm wgzpz. Vp-yznnpn y
gv kjmoz, jù nzmvdzio gzn jmbpzn, nz odzio pi epwé kjpm gz
cjhhzn, vqzx pi znxvgdzm ojpmivio lpd mzoziodo njpn gzn nvwjon

Gz bmviy ejpm, vmmdqvio kvm gzn qdomvps ojpo pidn, éxgvdm
jwgdlpzhzio gzn wvixn mvibén zi omvqzmn yz gv hpmvdggz, lp
ovkdnnz çà zo gà lpzglpz kvdggvnnji xgjpé, vtvio vp-yznnjpn yz gp
xzn hjon zi bmjnnzn gzoomzn: «Wvix yz H. pi ozg.» Kgpn gjdi, 
g'ziymjdo jù gz qvdnnzvp nz méoméxdo, gz xjiaznndjiivg avd
kziyvio à piz novopzooz yz gv Qdzmbz, qêopz y'piz mjwz yz nvodi
xjdaaéz y'pi qjdgz yz opggz nzhé y'éojdgzn y'vmbzio, zo ojp
zhkjpmkméz vps kjhhzoozn xjhhz piz dyjgz yzn îgzn Nviyrdxc; ziad
piz xjkdz yz gv Nvdioz Avhdggz, ziqjd yp hdidnomz yz g'dioémdzpm
yjhdivio gz hvîomz-vpozg ziomz lpvomz xcviyzgdzmn, ozmhdiz vp aji
gv kzmnkzxodqz. Gzn novggzn yp xcjzpm, zi wjdn yz nvkdi, nji
mznoézn nvin êomz kzdiozn

Gzn cvggzn, x'zno-à-ydmz pi ojdo yz opdgzn npkkjmoé kvm pi
qdibovdiz yz kjozvps, jxxpkzio à zggzn nzpgzn gv hjdodé ziqdmji y
gv bmviyz kgvxz y'Tjiqdggz. Gv hvdmdz, xjinompdoz npm gzn yznndi
y'pi vmxcdozxoz yz Kvmdn, zno piz hvidèmz yz ozhkgz bmzx lpd avd
g'vibgz, à xôoé yz gv hvdnji yp kcvmhvxdzi. Zggz v, vp mzu-yz
xcvpnnéz, omjdn xjgjiizn djidlpzn zo, vp kmzhdzm éovbz, pi
bvgzmdz à kgzdi xdiomz, oviydn lpz gz othkvi lpd gv ozmhdiz zn
mzhkgd kvm pi xjl bvpgjdn, vkkpté y'piz kvooz npm gv Xcvmoz z
ozivio yz g'vpomz gzn wvgvixzn yz gv epnodxz

Hvdn xz lpd voodmz gz kgpn gzn tzps, x'zno, zi avxz yz g'vpwzmb
yp Gdji y'jm, gv kcvmhvxdz yz H. Cjhvdn! Gz njdm, kmdixdkvgzhzio
lpviy nji lpdilpzo zno vggphé zo lpz gzn wjxvps mjpbzn zo qzmo
lpd zhwzggdnnzio nv yzqviopmz vggjibzio vp gjdi, npm gz njg, gzpm
yzps xgvmoén yz xjpgzpm; vgjmn, à omvqzmn zggzn, xjhhz yvin yz
azps yp Wzibvgz, n'ziomzqjdo g'jhwmz yp kcvmhvxdzi, vxxjpyé np
nji kpkdomz. Nv hvdnji, yp cvpo zi wvn, zno kgvxvmyé
y'dinxmdkodjin éxmdozn zi vibgvdnz, zi mjiyz, zi hjpgéz: «Zvps y
Qdxct, yz Nzgou zo yz Wvmèbzn, mjwn yékpmvodan, héyzxdiz Mvnkvdg
mvxvcjpo yzn Vmvwzn, kvnodggzn Yvmxzo, kâoz Mzbivpgo, wviyvbzn
wvdin, xcjxjgvon yz nvioé, zox.» Zo g'zinzdbiz, lpd odzio ojpoz g
gvmbzpm yz gv wjpodlpz, kjmoz zi gzoomzn y'jm: Cjhvdn, kcvmhvxdzi
Kpdn, vp ajiy yz gv wjpodlpz, yzmmdèmz gzn bmviyzn wvgvixz
nxzggézn npm gz xjhkojdm, gz hjo gvwjmvojdmz nz yémjpgz vp-yznnp
y'piz kjmoz qdoméz lpd, à hjdodé yz nv cvpozpm, mékèoz zixjmz pi
ajdn Cjhvdn, zi gzoomzn y'jm, npm pi ajiy ijdm

Dg i't v kgpn zinpdoz mdzi à qjdm yvin Tjiqdggz. Gv mpz (g
nzpgz), gjibpz y'piz kjmoéz yz apndg zo wjmyéz yz lpzglpz
wjpodlpzn, n'vmmêoz xjpmo vp ojpmivio yz gv mjpoz. Nd ji gv gvdnn
npm gv ymjdoz zo lpz g'ji npdqz gz wvn yz gv xôoz Nvdio-Ezvi
wdzioôo ji vmmdqz vp xdhzodèmz

Gjmn yp xcjgémv, kjpm g'vbmviydm, ji v vwvoop pi kvi yz hpm z
vxczoé omjdn vxmzn yz ozmmz à xôoé; hvdn ojpoz xzooz kjmodj
ijpqzggz zno kmznlpz dicvwdoéz, gzn ojhwzn, xjhhz vpomzajdn
xjiodipvio à n'ziovnnzm qzmn gv kjmoz. Gz bvmydzi, lpd zno zi hêh
ozhkn ajnnjtzpm zo wzyzvp à g'ébgdnz (odmvio vdind yzn xvyvqmzn y
gv kvmjdnnz pi yjpwgz wéiéadxz), v kmjadoé, yp ozmmvdi qdyz kjpm 
nzhzm yzn kjhhzn yz ozmmz. Y'viiéz zi viiéz, xzkziyvio, nji kzod
xcvhk nz méoméxdo, zo, gjmnlp'dg npmqdzio piz ékdyéhdz, dg iz nvd
kvn n'dg yjdo nz méejpdm yzn yéxèn jp n'vaagdbzm yzn nékpgopmzn

-- Qjpn qjpn ijpmmdnnzu yzn hjmon, Gznodwjpyjdn! gpd ydo ziadi p
ejpm, H. gz xpmé

Xzooz kvmjgz njhwmz gz ado méagéxcdm; zggz g'vmmêov kjpm lpzglp
ozhkn; hvdn, vpejpmy'cpd zixjmz, dg xjiodipz gv xpgopmz yz nz
opwzmxpgzn, zo hêhz njpodzio vqzx vkgjhw lp'dgn kjpnnzi
ivopmzggzhzio

Yzkpdn gzn éqéizhzion lpz g'ji qv mvxjiozm; mdzi, zi zaazo, i'
xcvibé à Tjiqdggz. Gz ymvkzvp omdxjgjmz yz azm-wgvix ojpmi
ojpejpmn vp cvpo yp xgjxczm yz g'ébgdnz; gv wjpodlpz yp hvmxcvi
yz ijpqzvpoén vbdoz zixjmz vp qzio nzn yzps wviyzmjgzn y'diydziiz
gzn ajzopn yp kcvmhvxdzi, xjhhz yzn kvlpzon y'vhvyjp wgvix, n
kjpmmdnnzio yz kgpn zi kgpn yvin gzpm vgxjjg wjpmwzps, zo, vp
yznnpn yz gv bmviyz kjmoz yz g'vpwzmbz, gz qdzps gdji y'jm
yéozdio kvm gzn kgpdzn, hjiomz ojpejpmn vps kvnnvion nv amdnpmz y
xvidxcz

Gz njdm lpz gzn ékjps Wjqvmt yzqvdzio vmmdqzm à Tjiqdggz, hvyvh
qzpqz Gzamviçjdn, gv hvîomznnz yz xzooz vpwzmbz, éovdo nd ajm
vaavdméz, lp'zggz npvdo à bmjnnzn bjpoozn zi mzhpvio nz
xvnnzmjgzn. X'éovdo gz gziyzhvdi ejpm yz hvmxcé yvin gz wjpmb. D
avggvdo y'vqvixz ovdggzm gzn qdviyzn, qdyzm gzn kjpgzon, avdmz y
gv njpkz zo yp xvaé. Zggz vqvdo, yz kgpn, gz mzkvn yz nz
kzindjiivdmzn, xzgpd yp héyzxdi, yz nv azhhz zo yz gzpm wjiiz; g
wdggvmy mzoziodnnvdo y'éxgvon yz mdmz; omjdn hzpidzmn, yvin g
kzodoz nvggz, vkkzgvdzio kjpm lp'ji gzpm vkkjmoâo yz g'zvp-yz-qdz
gz wjdn agvhwvdo, gv wmvdnz xmvlpvdo, zo, npm gv gjibpz ovwgz y
gv xpdndiz, kvmhd gzn lpvmodzmn yz hjpoji xmp, n'égzqvdzio yz
kdgzn y'vnndzoozn lpd omzhwgvdzio vps nzxjpnnzn yp wdggjo jù g'j
cvxcvdo yzn ékdivmyn. Ji zioziyvdo, yvin gv wvnnz-xjpm, xmdzm gz
qjgvdggzn lpz gv nzmqvioz kjpmnpdqvdo kjpm gzpm xjpkzm gz xjp

Pi cjhhz zi kviojpagzn yz kzvp qzmoz, lpzglpz kzp hvmlpé yz kzodo
qémjgz zo xjdaaé y'pi wjiizo yz qzgjpmn à bgviy y'jm, nz xcvpaavd
gz yjn xjiomz gv xczhdiéz. Nv adbpmz i'zskmdhvdo mdzi lpz g
nvodnavxodji yz njd-hêhz, zo dg vqvdo g'vdm vpnnd xvghz yvin g
qdz lpz gz xcvmyjiizmzo npnkziyp vp-yznnpn yz nv oêoz, yvin pi
xvbz y'jndzm: x'éovdo gz kcvmhvxdzi

-- Vmoéhdnz! xmdvdo gv hvîomznnz y'vpwzmbz, xvnnz yz gv wjpmméz
zhkgdn gzn xvmvazn, vkkjmoz yz g'zvp-yz-qdz, yékêxcz-ojd! V
hjdin, nd ez nvqvdn lpzg yznnzmo jaamdm à gv njxdéoé lpz qjp
vooziyzu! Wjioé ydqdiz! gzn xjhhdn yp yéhéivbzhzio mzxjhhzixzi
gzpm odiovhvmmz yvin gz wdggvmy! Zo gzpm xcvmmzooz lpd zno mznoé
njpn gv bmviyz kjmoz! G'Cdmjiyzggz zno xvkvwgz yz gv yéajixzm z
vmmdqvio! Vkkzggz Kjgtoz kjpm lp'dg gv mzhdnz!... Ydmz lpz, yzkpd
gz hvodi, hjindzpm Cjhvdn, dgn jio kzpo-êomz avdo lpdiuz kvmodz
zo wp cpdo kjon yz xdymz!... Hvdn dgn qjio hz yéxcdmzm gz ovkdn
xjiodipvdo-zggz zi gzn mzbvmyvio yz gjdi, nji éxphjdmz à gv hvdi

-- Gz hvg iz nzmvdo kvn bmviy, mékjiydo H. Cjhvdn qjpn z
vxcèozmdzu pi vpomz

-- Pi vpomz wdggvmy! zsxgvhv gv qzpqz

-- Kpdnlpz xzgpd-gà iz odzio kgpn, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn; ez qjpn g
mékèoz, qjpn qjpn avdozn ojmo! qjpn qjpn avdozn bmviy ojmo! Z
kpdn gzn vhvozpmn, à kménzio, qzpgzio yzn wgjpnzn éomjdozn zo yz
lpzpzn gjpmyzn. Ji iz ejpz kgpn gv wdggz; ojpo zno xcvibé! Dg avp
hvmxczm vqzx nji ndèxgz! Mzbvmyzu Ozggdzm, kgpoôo..

G'côoznnz yzqdio mjpbz yz yékdo. Gz kcvmhvxdzi vejpov

-- Nji wdggvmy, qjpn vqzu wzvp ydmz, zno kgpn hdbiji lpz gz qôomz
zo lp'ji vdo g'dyéz, kvm zszhkgz yz hjiozm piz kjpgz kvomdjodlp
kjpm gv Kjgjbiz jp gzn dijiyén yz Gtji..

-- Xz iz njio kvn yzn bpzps xjhhz gpd lpd ijpn ajio kzpm
diozmmjhkdo g'côoznnz, zi cvpnnvio nzn bmjnnzn ékvpgzn. Vggzu
vggzu! hjindzpm Cjhvdn, ovio lpz gz Gdji y'jm qdqmv, ji t qdziymv
Ijpn vqjin yp ajdi yvin ijn wjoozn, ijpn vpomzn! Vp gdzp lp'pi y
xzn hvmdin qjpn qzmmzu gz Xvaé amviçvdn azmhé, zo vqzx piz wzgg
vaadxcz npm gzn vpqzion!... Xcvibzm hji wdggvmy, xjiodipvdo-zgg
zi nz kvmgvio à zggz-hêhz, gpd lpd h'zno nd xjhhjyz kjpm mvibzm h
gznndqz, zo npm gzlpzg, yvin gz ozhkn yz gv xcvnnz, e'vd hd
xjpxczm epnlp'à nds qjtvbzpmn!... Hvdn xz gvhwdi y'Cdqzmo lp
i'vmmdqz kvn

-- G'vooziyzu-qjpn kjpm gz yîizm yz qjn hznndzpmn? yzhviyv g
kcvmhvxdzi

-- G'vooziymz? Zo H. Wdizo yjix! À nds czpmzn wvoovio qjpn vggz
gz qjdm ziomzm, xvm nji kvmzdg i'zsdnoz kvn npm gv ozmmz kjp
g'zsvxodopyz. Dg gpd avpo ojpejpmn nv kgvxz yvin gv kzodoz nvggz
Ji gz opzmvdo kgpoôo lpz yz gz avdmz yîizm vdggzpmn! zo yébjûo
lp'dg zno! zo nd ydaadxdgz kjpm gz xdymz! Xz i'zno kvn xjhh
H. Géji; gpd, dg vmmdqz lpzglpzajdn à nzko czpmzn, nzko czpmzn z
yzhdz hêhz; dg iz mzbvmyz nzpgzhzio kvn à xz lp'dg hvibz. Lpzg wj
ezpiz cjhhz! evhvdn pi hjo kgpn cvpo lpz g'vpomz

-- X'zno lp'dg t v wdzi yz gv ydaaémzixz, qjtzu-qjpn, ziom
lpzglp'pi lpd v mzçp yz g'éypxvodji zo pi vixdzi xvmvwdidzm lp
zno kzmxzkozpm

Nds czpmzn njiièmzio. Wdizo ziomv

Dg éovdo qêop y'piz mzydibjoz wgzpz, ojhwvio ymjdo y'zggz-hêh
ojpo vpojpm yz nji xjmkn hvdbmz, zo nv xvnlpzooz yz xpdm, à kvooz
ijpézn kvm yzn xjmyjin npm gz njhhzo yz nv oêoz, gvdnnvdo qjdm
njpn gv qdndèmz mzgzqéz, pi amjio xcvpqz, lp'vqvdo yékmdh
g'cvwdopyz yp xvnlpz. Dg kjmovdo pi bdgzo yz ymvk ijdm, pi xjg y
xmdi, pi kviovgji bmdn, zo, zi ojpoz nvdnji, yzn wjoozn wdz
xdmézn lpd vqvdzio yzps mziagzhzion kvmvggègzn, à xvpnz yz g
nvdggdz yz nzn jmozdgn. Kvn pi kjdg iz yékvnnvdo gv gdbiz yz nj
xjggdzm wgjiy, lpd, xjiojpmivio gv hâxcjdmz, zixvymvdo xjhhz g
wjmypmz y'piz kgvoz-wviyz nv gjibpz adbpmz ozmiz, yjio gzn tzp
éovdzio kzodon zo gz izu wpnlpé. Ajmo à ojpn gzn ezps yz xvmozn
wji xcvnnzpm zo kjnnéyvio piz wzggz éxmdopmz, dg vqvdo xczu gpd p
ojpm, jù dg n'vhpnvdo à ojpmizm yzn mjiyn yz nzmqdzooz yjio d
zixjhwmvdo nv hvdnji, vqzx gv evgjpndz y'pi vmodnoz zo g'ébjïnh
y'pi wjpmbzjdn

Dg nz ydmdbzv qzmn gv kzodoz nvggz; hvdn dg avggpo y'vwjmy z
avdmz njmodm gzn omjdn hzpidzmn; zo, kziyvio ojpo gz ozhkn lp
g'ji apo à hzoomz nji xjpqzmo, Wdizo mznov ndgzixdzps à nv kgvxz
vpkmèn yp kjêgz; kpdn dg azmhv gv kjmoz zo mzodmv nv xvnlpzooz
xjhhz y'pnvbz

-- Xz iz njio kvn gzn xdqdgdoén lpd gpd pnzmjio gv gvibpz! ydo g
kcvmhvxdzi, yèn lp'dg apo nzpg vqzx g'côoznnz

-- Evhvdn dg iz xvpnz yvqviovbz, mékjiydo-zggz; dg zno qzip dxd
gv nzhvdiz yzmidèmz, yzps qjtvbzpmn zi ymvkn, yzn bvmçjin kgzdi
y'znkmdo lpd xjiovdzio, gz njdm, pi ovn yz avmxzn lpz e'z
kgzpmvdn yz mdmz; zc wdzi, dg mznovdo gà, xjhhz piz vgjnz, nvi
ydmz pi hjo

-- Jpd, ado gz kcvmhvxdzi, kvn y'dhvbdivodji, kvn yz nvdggdzn
mdzi yz xz lpd xjinodopz g'cjhhz yz njxdéoé

-- Ji ydo kjpmovio lp'dg v yzn hjtzin, jwezxov g'côoznnz

-- Yzn hjtzin? mékgdlpv H. Cjhvdn; gpd! yzn hjtzin? Yvin n
kvmodz, x'zno kjnndwgz, vejpov-o-dg y'pi oji kgpn xvghz

Zo dg mzkmdo

-- Vc! lp'pi iébjxdvio lpd v yzn mzgvodjin xjindyémvwgzn, lp'p
epmdnxjinpgoz, pi héyzxdi, pi kcvmhvxdzi njdzio ozggzhzio vwnjmwé
lp'dgn zi yzqdziizio aviovnlpzn zo wjpmmpn hêhz, ez gz xjhkmziyn
ji zi xdoz yzn omvdon yvin gzn cdnojdmzn! Hvdn, vp hjdin, x'zn
lp'dgn kzinzio à lpzglpz xcjnz. Hjd, kvm zszhkgz, xjhwdzi yz ajd
h'zno-dg vmmdqé yz xczmxczm hv kgphz npm hji wpmzvp kjpm éxmdm
piz éodlpzooz, zo yz omjpqzm, zi yéadidodqz, lpz ez g'vqvdn kgvxé
à hji jmzdggz

Xzkziyvio, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn vggv npm gz nzpdg mzbvmyzm n
g'Cdmjiyzggz i'vmmdqvdo kvn. Zggz omznnvdggdo. Pi cjhhz qêop y
ijdm ziomv ojpo à xjpk yvin gv xpdndiz. Ji ydnodibpvdo, vp
yzmidèmzn gpzpmn yp xmékpnxpgz, lp'dg vqvdo gv adbpmz mpwdxjiyz z
gz xjmkn vocgéodlpz

-- Lp't v-o-dg kjpm qjomz nzmqdxz, hjindzpm gz xpmé? yzhviyv g
hvîomznnz y'vpwzmbz, ojpo zi voozdbivio npm gv xczhdiéz pi yz
agvhwzvps yz xpdqmz lpd n't omjpqvdzio mvibén zi xjgjiivyz vqz
gzpmn xcviyzggzn; qjpgzu-qjpn kmziymz lpzglpz xcjnz? pi yjdbo y
xvnndn, pi qzmmz yz qdi

G'zxxgéndvnodlpz mzapnv ajmo xdqdgzhzio. Dg qzivdo xczmxczm nj
kvmvkgpdz, lp'dg vqvdo jpwgdé g'vpomz ejpm vp xjpqzio y'Zmizhjio
zo, vkmèn vqjdm kmdé hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn yz gz gpd avdmz mzhzoomz v
kmznwtoèmz yvin gv njdméz, dg njmodo kjpm nz mziymz à g'ébgdnz, j
g'ji njiivdo g'Vibzgpn

Lpviy gz kcvmhvxdzi i'zioziydo kgpn npm gv kgvxz gz wmpdo yz nz
njpgdzmn, dg omjpqv ajmo dixjiqzivioz nv xjiypdoz yz ojpo 
g'czpmz. Xz mzapn y'vxxzkozm pi mvamvîxcdnnzhzio gpd nzhwgvdo pi
ctkjxmdndz yzn kgpn jydzpnzn; gzn kmêomzn bjyvdggvdzio ojpn nvi
lp'ji gzn qîo, zo xczmxcvdzio à mvhzizm gz ozhkn yz gv yîhz

G'côoznnz kmdo gv yéazinz yz nji xpmé

-- Y'vdggzpmn, dg zi kgdzmvdo lpvomz xjhhz qjpn npm nji bzijp. D
v, g'viiéz yzmidèmz, vdyé ijn bzin à mziomzm gv kvdggz; dg z
kjmovdo epnlp'à nds wjoozn à gv ajdn, ovio dg zno ajmo

-- Wmvqj! ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi. Ziqjtzu yjix qjn adggzn zi xjiaznnz 
yzn bvdggvmyn y'pi ozhkémvhzio kvmzdg! Hjd, nd e'éovdn g
bjpqzmizhzio, ez qjpymvdn lp'ji nvdbiâo gzn kmêomzn piz ajdn kv
hjdn. Jpd, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, ojpn gzn hjdn, piz gvmb
kcgéwjojhdz, yvin g'dioémêo yz gv kjgdxz zo yzn hjzpmn

-- Ovdnzu-qjpn yjix, hjindzpm Cjhvdn! qjpn êozn pi dhkdz! qjp
i'vqzu kvn yz mzgdbdji

Gz kcvmhvxdzi mékjiydo

-- E'vd piz mzgdbdji, hv mzgdbdji, zo hêhz e'zi vd kgpn lp'zp
ojpn, vqzx gzpmn hjhzmdzn zo gzpmn ejibgzmdzn! E'vyjmz Ydzp, v
xjiomvdmz! ez xmjdn zi g'Êomz npkmêhz, à pi Xmévozpm, lpzg lp'd
njdo, kzp h'dhkjmoz, lpd ijpn v kgvxén dxd-wvn kjpm t mzhkgdm ij
yzqjdmn yz xdojtzi zo yz kèmz yz avhdggz; hvdn ez i'vd kvn wznjd
y'vggzm, yvin piz ébgdnz, wvdnzm yzn kgvon y'vmbzio, zo zibmvdnnz
yz hv kjxcz pi ovn yz avmxzpmn lpd nz ijpmmdnnzio hdzps lpz ijpn
Xvm ji kzpo g'cjijmzm vpnnd wdzi yvin pi wjdn, yvin pi xcvhk, j
hêhz zi xjiozhkgvio gv qjûoz éocéméz, xjhhz gzn vixdzin. Hji Ydzp
à hjd, x'zno gz Ydzp yz Njxmvoz, yz Amvifgdi, yz Qjgovdmz zo y
Wémvibzm! Ez npdn kjpm gv Kmjaznndji yz ajd yp qdxvdmz nvqjtvmy z
gzn dhhjmozgn kmdixdkzn yz 89! Vpnnd, ez i'vyhzon kvn pi wjicjhh
yz wji Ydzp lpd nz kmjhèiz yvin nji kvmozmmz gv xviiz à gv hvdi
gjbz nzn vhdn yvin gz qziomz yzn wvgzdizn, hzpmo zi kjpnnvio p
xmd zo mznnpnxdoz vp wjpo yz omjdn ejpmn: xcjnzn vwnpmyzn z
zggzn-hêhzn zo xjhkgèozhzio jkkjnézn, y'vdggzpmn, à ojpozn gz
gjdn yz gv kctndlpz; xz lpd ijpn yéhjiomz, zi kvnnvio, lpz gz
kmêomzn jio ojpejpmn xmjpkd yvin piz dbijmvixz opmkdyz, jù dg
n'zaajmxzio y'zibgjpodm vqzx zps gzn kjkpgvodjin

Dg nz opo, xczmxcvio yzn tzps pi kpwgdx vpojpm yz gpd, xvm, yvi
nji zaazmqznxzixz, gz kcvmhvxdzi pi hjhzio n'éovdo xmp zi kgzd
xjinzdg hpidxdkvg. Hvdn gv hvîomznnz y'vpwzmbz iz g'éxjpovdo kgpn
zggz oziyvdo nji jmzdggz à pi mjpgzhzio égjdbié. Ji ydnodibpv g
wmpdo y'piz qjdopmz hêgé à pi xgvlpzhzio yz azmn gâxczn lp
wvoovdzio gv ozmmz, zo g'Cdmjiyzggz ziadi n'vmmêov yzqvio g
kjmoz

X'éovdo pi xjaamz evpiz kjmoé kvm yzps bmviyzn mjpzn lpd, hjiovi
epnlp'à gv cvpozpm yz gv wâxcz, zhkêxcvdzio gzn qjtvbzpmn yz qjd
gv mjpoz zo gzpm nvgdnnvdzio gzn ékvpgzn. Gzn kzodon xvmmzvps y
nzn qvndnovn éomjdon omzhwgvdzio yvin gzpmn xcânndn lpviy g
qjdopmz éovdo azmhéz, zo bvmyvdzio yzn ovxczn yz wjpz, çà zo gà
kvmhd gzpm qdzdggz xjpxcz yz kjpnndèmz, lpz gzn kgpdzn y'jmvb
hêhz iz gvqvdzio kvn ojpo à avdo. Zggz éovdo voozgéz yz omjd
xczqvps, yjio gz kmzhdzm zi vmwvgèoz, zo, gjmnlp'ji yznxziyvdo gz
xôozn, zggz ojpxcvdo yp ajiy zi xvcjovio

Lpzglpzn wjpmbzjdn y'Tjiqdggz vmmdqèmzio npm gv kgvxz; dg
kvmgvdzio ojpn à gv ajdn, yzhviyvio yzn ijpqzggzn, yz
zskgdxvodjin zo yzn wjpmmdxczn; Cdqzmo iz nvqvdo vplpzg mékjiymz
X'éovdo gpd lpd avdnvdo à gv qdggz gzn xjhhdnndjin yp kvtn. D
vggvdo yvin gzn wjpodlpzn, mvkkjmovdo yzn mjpgzvps yz xpdm v
xjmyjiidzm, yz gv azmmvdggz vp hvméxcvg, pi wvmdg yz cvmzibn kjp
nv hvîomznnz, yzn wjiizon yz xczu gv hjydnoz, yzn ojpkzon yz xcz
gz xjdaazpm; zo, gz gjib yz gv mjpoz, zi n'zi mzqzivio, d
ydnomdwpvdo nzn kvlpzon, lp'dg ezovdo kvm-yznnpn gzn xgôopmzn yz
xjpmn, yzwjpo npm nji ndèbz, zo xmdvio à kgzdiz kjdomdiz, kziyvi
lpz nzn xczqvps vggvdzio ojpo nzpgn

Pi vxxdyzio g'vqvdo mzovmyé: gv gzqmzooz yz hvyvhz Wjqvmt n'éovd
ziapdz à omvqzmn xcvhkn. Ji g'vqvdo ndaagéz pi bmviy lpvm
y'czpmz. Cdqzmo hêhz éovdo mzojpmié y'piz yzhd-gdzpz zi vmmdèmz
xmjtvio g'vkzmxzqjdm à xcvlpz hdipoz; hvdn dg vqvdo avgg
xjiodipzm gv mjpoz. Zhhv vqvdo kgzpmé, n'éovdo zhkjmoéz; zgg
vqvdo vxxpné Xcvmgzn yz xz hvgczpm. H. Gczpmzps, hvmxcvi
y'éojaazn, lpd nz omjpqvdo vqzx zggz yvin gv qjdopmz, vqvdo znnvt
yz gv xjinjgzm kvm lpviodoé y'zszhkgzn yz xcdzin kzmypn
mzxjiivdnnvio gzpm hvîomz vp wjpo yz gjibpzn viiézn. Ji zi xdovd
pi, ydnvdo-dg, lpd éovdo mzqzip yz Xjinoviodijkgz à Kvmdn. P
vpomz vqvdo avdo xdilpvioz gdzpzn zi gdbiz ymjdoz zo kvnné lpvom
mdqdèmzn à gv ivbz; zo nji kèmz à gpd-hêhz vqvdo kjnnéyé p
xvidxcz lpd, vkmèn yjpuz vin y'vwnzixz, gpd vqvdo ojpo à xjp
nvpoé npm gz yjn, pi njdm, yvin gv mpz, xjhhz dg vggvdo yîizm z
qdggz


D

Zhhv yznxziydo gv kmzhdèmz, kpdn Aégdxdoé, H. Gczpmzps, pi
ijpmmdxz, zo g'ji apo jwgdbé yz méqzdggzm Xcvmgzn yvin nji xjdi
jù dg n'éovdo ziyjmhd xjhkgèozhzio yèn lpz gv ipdo éovdo qzipz

Cjhvdn nz kménziov; dg jaamdo nzn cjhhvbzn à Hvyvhz, nzn xdqdgdoé
à Hjindzpm, ydo lp'dg éovdo xcvmhé y'vqjdm kp gzpm mziymz lpzglp
nzmqdxz, zo vejpov y'pi vdm xjmydvg lp'dg vqvdo jné n'diqdozm gpd
hêhz, nv azhhz y'vdggzpmn éovio vwnzioz

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, lpviy zggz apo yvin gv xpdndiz, n'vkkmjxcv yz g
xczhdiéz. Yp wjpo yz nzn yzps yjdbon, zggz kmdo nv mjwz à g
cvpozpm yp bzijp, zo, g'vtvio vdind mzhjioéz epnlp'vps xczqdggzn
zggz oziydo à gv agvhhz, kvm-yznnpn gz bdbjo lpd ojpmivdo, nj
kdzy xcvpnné y'piz wjoodiz ijdmz. Gz azp g'éxgvdmvdo zi ziodzm
kéiéomvio y'piz gphdèmz xmpz gv omvhz yz nv mjwz, gzn kjmzn ébvp
yz nv kzvp wgvixcz zo hêhz gzn kvpkdèmzn yz nzn tzps lp'zgg
xgdbivdo yz ozhkn à vpomz. Piz bmviyz xjpgzpm mjpbz kvnnvdo np
zggz, nzgji gz njpaagz yp qzio lpd qzivdo kvm gv kjmo
ziomjpqzmoz

Yz g'vpomz xôoé yz gv xczhdiéz, pi ezpiz cjhhz à xczqzgpmz wgjiy
gv mzbvmyvdo ndgzixdzpnzhzio

Xjhhz dg n'ziiptvdo wzvpxjpk à Tjiqdggz, jù dg éovdo xgzmx xcz
hvîomz Bpdggvphdi, njpqzio H. Géji Ypkpdn (x'éovdo gpd, gz nzxji
cvwdopé yp Gdji y'jm) mzxpgvdo g'dinovio yz nji mzkvn, znkémvi
lp'dg qdziymvdo lpzglpz qjtvbzpm à g'vpwzmbz vqzx lpd xvpnzm yvi
gv njdméz. Gzn ejpmn lpz nv wznjbiz éovdo adidz dg gpd avggvd
wdzi, avpoz yz nvqjdm lpz avdmz, vmmdqzm à g'czpmz zsvxoz, z
npwdm yzkpdn gv njpkz epnlp'vp amjhvbz gz oêoz-à-oêoz yz Wdizo. X
apo yjix vqzx ejdz lp'dg vxxzkov gv kmjkjndodji yz g'côoznnz y
yîizm zi gv xjhkvbidz yzn ijpqzvps qzipn, zo g'ji kvnnv yvin g
bmviyz nvggz, jù hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, kvm kjhkz, vqvdo avdo ymznnz
gzn lpvomz xjpqzmon

Cjhvdn yzhviyv gv kzmhdnndji yz bvmyzm nji wjiizo bmzx, yz kzp
yzn xjmtuvn

Kpdn, nz ojpmivio qzmn nv qjdndiz

-- Hvyvhz, nvin yjpoz, zno pi kzp gvnnz? Ji zno n
ékjpqviovwgzhzio xvcjoé yvin ijomz Cdmjiyzggz

-- Dg zno qmvd, mékjiydo Zhhv; hvdn gz yémvibzhzio h'vhpn
ojpejpmn; e'vdhz à xcvibzm yz kgvxz

-- X'zno piz xcjnz nd hvpnnvyz, njpkdmv gz xgzmx, lpz yz qdqm
xgjpé vps hêhzn ziymjdon

-- Nd qjpn éodzu xjhhz hjd, ydo Xcvmgzn, nvin xznnz jwgdbé y'êom
à xczqvg..

-- Hvdn, mzkmdo Géji. n'vymznnvio à hvyvhz Wjqvmt, mdzi i'zno kgp
vbmévwgz, dg hz nzhwgz; lpviy ji gz kzpo, vejpov-o-dg

-- Yp mznoz, ydnvdo g'vkjocdxvdmz, g'zszmxdxz yz gv héyzxdiz i'zn
kvn ajmo kéidwgz zi ijn xjiomézn; xvm g'éovo yz ijn mjpozn kzmhz
g'pnvbz yp xvwmdjgzo, zo, béiémvgzhzio, g'ji kvtz vnnzu wdzi, gz
xpgodqvozpmn éovio vdnén. Ijpn vqjin, njpn gz mvkkjmo héydxvg, 
kvmo gzn xvn jmydivdmzn y'zioémdoz, wmjixcdoz, vaazxodji
wdgdzpnzn, zox., yz ozhkn à vpomz lpzglpzn adèqmzn diozmhdoozioz
à gv hjdnnji, hvdn, zi njhhz, kzp yz xcjnzn bmvqzn, mdzi y
nkéxdvg à ijozm, nd xz i'zno wzvpxjpk y'cphzpmn amjdyzn, zo lp
odziizio nvin yjpoz vps yékgjmvwgzn xjiydodjin ctbdéidlpzn yz ij
gjbzhzion yz kvtnvi. Vc! qjpn omjpqzmzu wdzi yzn kméepbén 
xjhwvoomz, hjindzpm Wjqvmt; wdzi yzn zioêozhzion yz gv mjpodiz, j
nz czpmozmjio lpjodydziizhzio ojpn gzn zaajmon yz qjomz nxdzixz
xvm ji v mzxjpmn zixjmz vps izpqvdizn, vps mzgdlpzn, vp xpmé
kgpoôo lpz yz qzidm ivopmzggzhzio xczu gz héyzxdi jp xczu g
kcvmhvxdzi. Gz xgdhvo, kjpmovio, i'zno kjdio, à qmvd ydmz
hvpqvdn, zo hêhz ijpn xjhkojin yvin gv xjhhpiz lpzglpz
ijivbéivdmzn. Gz oczmhjhèomz (e'zi vd avdo gzn jwnzmqvodjin
yznxziy zi cdqzm epnlp'à lpvomz yzbmén, zo, yvin gv ajmoz nvdnji
ojpxcz qdibo-xdil, omzioz xziodbmvyzn ojpo vp kgpn, xz lpd ijp
yjiiz qdibo-lpvomz Mévphpm vp hvsdhph, jp vpomzhzio xdilpvioz
lpvomz Avcmziczdo (hznpmz vibgvdnz), kvn yvqviovbz! -- zo, z
zaazo, ijpn njhhzn vwmdoén yzn qzion yp ijmy kvm gv ajmê
y'Vmbpzdg y'piz kvmo, yzn qzion y'jpzno kvm gv xôoz Nvdio-Ezvi y
g'vpomz, zo xzooz xcvgzpm, xzkziyvio, lpd à xvpnz yz gv qvkzp
y'zvp yébvbéz kvm gv mdqdèmz zo gv kménzixz xjindyémvwgz y
wznodvps yvin gzn kmvdmdzn, gznlpzgn zscvgzio, xjhhz qjpn nvqzu
wzvpxjpk y'vhhjidvlpz, x'zno-à-ydmz vujoz, ctymjbèiz zo jstbèi
(iji, vujoz zo ctymjbèiz nzpgzhzio), zo lpd, kjhkvio à zgg
g'cphpn yz gv ozmmz, xjiajiyvio ojpozn xzn éhvivodjin ydaaémziozn
gzn mépidnnvio zi pi avdnxzvp, kjpm vdind ydmz, zo nz xjhwdivio y
njd-hêhz vqzx g'égzxomdxdoé mékviypz yvin g'vohjnkcèmz, gjmnlp'd
t zi v, kjpmmvdo à gv gjibpz, xjhhz yvin gzn kvtn omjkdxvps
zibziymzm yzn hdvnhzn dinvgpwmzn; -- xzooz xcvgzpm, ydn-ez, n
omjpqz epnozhzio ozhkéméz yp xôoé jù zggz qdzio, jp kgpoôo y'j
zggz qdziymvdo, x'zno-à-ydmz yp xôoé npy, kvm gzn qzion yz npy
zno, gznlpzgn, n'éovio mvamvîxcdn y'zps-hêhzn zi kvnnvio npm g
Nzdiz, ijpn vmmdqzio lpzglpzajdn ojpo y'pi xjpk, xjhhz yzn wmdnz
yz Mpnndz

-- Vqzu-qjpn yp hjdin lpzglpzn Kmjhzivyzn yvin gzn ziqdmjin
xjiodipvdo hvyvhz Wjqvmt kvmgvio vp ezpiz cjhhz

-- Jc! ajmo kzp, mékjiydo-dg. Dg t v pi ziymjdo lpz g'ji ijhhz g
Kâopmz, npm gz cvpo yz gv xôoz, à gv gdndèmz yz gv ajmêo
Lpzglpzajdn, gz ydhvixcz, ez qvdn gà, zo e't mznoz vqzx pi gdqmz
à mzbvmyzm gz njgzdg xjpxcvio

-- Ez iz omjpqz mdzi y'vyhdmvwgz xjhhz gzn njgzdgn xjpxcvion
mzkmdo-zggz, hvdn vp wjmy yz gv hzm, npmojpo

-- Jc! e'vyjmz gv hzm, ydo H. Géji

-- Zo kpdn iz qjpn nzhwgz-o-dg kvn, mékgdlpv hvyvhz Wjqvmt, lp
g'znkmdo qjbpz kgpn gdwmzhzio npm xzooz éoziypz nvin gdhdozn, yji
gv xjiozhkgvodji qjpn égèqz g'âhz zo yjiiz yzn dyézn y'diadid
y'dyévg

-- Dg zi zno yz hêhz yzn kvtnvbzn yz hjiovbizn, mzkmdo Géji. E'v
pi xjpndi lpd v qjtvbé zi Npdnnz g'viiéz yzmidèmz, zo lpd h
ydnvdo lp'ji iz kzpo nz adbpmzm gv kjéndz yzn gvxn, gz xcvmhz yz
xvnxvyzn, g'zaazo bdbvioznlpz yzn bgvxdzmn. Ji qjdo yzn kdin y'pi
bmviyzpm dixmjtvwgz, zi omvqzmn yzn ojmmzion, yzn xvwviz
npnkziypzn npm yzn kméxdkdxzn, zo, à hdggz kdzyn njpn qjpn, yz
qvggézn ziodèmzn, lpviy gzn ipvbzn n'ziomjpqmzio. Xzn nkzxovxgz
yjdqzio ziocjpndvnhzm, ydnkjnzm à gv kmdèmz, à g'zsovnz! Vpnnd e
iz h'éojiiz kgpn yz xz hpndxdzi xégèwmz lpd, kjpm zsxdozm hdzp
nji dhvbdivodji, vqvdo xjpophz y'vggzm ejpzm yp kdvij yzqvi
lpzglpz ndoz dhkjnvio

-- Qjpn avdozn yz gv hpndlpz? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Iji, hvdn ez g'vdhz wzvpxjpk, mékjiydo-dg

-- Vc! iz g'éxjpozu kvn, hvyvhz Wjqvmt, diozmmjhkdo Cjhvdn zi n
kzixcvio npm nji vnndzooz, x'zno hjyznodz kpmz. -- Xjhhzio, hj
xczm! Zc! g'vpomz ejpm, yvin qjomz xcvhwmz, qjpn xcviodzu _g'Vib
bvmydzi_ à mvqdm. Ez qjpn zioziyvdn yp gvwjmvojdmz; qjpn yéovxcdz
xzgv xjhhz pi vxozpm

Géji, zi zaazo, gjbzvdo xczu gz kcvmhvxdzi, jù dg vqvdo piz kzodo
kdèxz vp nzxjiy éovbz, npm gv kgvxz. Dg mjpbdo à xz xjhkgdhzio y
nji kmjkmdéovdmz, lpd yéeà n'éovdo ojpmié qzmn gz héyzxdi zo gp
éiphémvdo gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn gzn kmdixdkvps cvwdovio
y'Tjiqdggz. Dg mvxjiovdo yzn vizxyjozn, yjiivdo yz
mzinzdbizhzion; ji iz nvqvdo kvn vp epnoz gv ajmopiz yp ijovdmz
zo dg t vqvdo gv hvdnji Opqvxcz lpd avdnvdo wzvpxjpk y'zhwvmmvn

Zhhv mzkmdo

-- Zo lpzggz hpndlpz kméaémzu-qjpn

-- Jc! gv hpndlpz vggzhviyz, xzggz lpd kjmoz à mêqzm

-- Xjiivdnnzu-qjpn gzn Dovgdzin

-- Kvn zixjmz; hvdn ez gzn qzmmvd g'viiéz kmjxcvdiz, lpviy e'dmv
cvwdozm Kvmdn, kjpm adidm hji ymjdo

-- X'zno xjhhz e'vqvdn g'cjiizpm, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi, yz g'zskmdhz
à H. qjomz ékjps, à kmjkjn yz xz kvpqmz Tvijyv lpd n'zno ziapd
qjpn qjpn omjpqzmzu, bmâxz vps ajgdzn lp'dg v avdozn, ejpdm y'pi
yzn hvdnjin gzn kgpn xjiajmovwgzn y'Tjiqdggz. Xz lp'zggz 
kmdixdkvgzhzio yz xjhhjyz kjpm pi héyzxdi, x'zno piz kjmoz np
g'Vggéz, lpd kzmhzo y'ziomzm zo yz njmodm nvin êomz qp
Y'vdggzpmn, zggz zno ajpmidz yz ojpo xz lpd zno vbmévwgz à p
héivbz: wpviyzmdz, xpdndiz vqzx jaadxz, nvgji yz avhdggz
ampdodzm, zox. X'éovdo pi bvdggvmy lpd i't mzbvmyvdo kvn! D
n'éovdo avdo xjinompdmz, vp wjpo yp evmydi, à xôoé yz g'zvp, pi
ojiizggz ojpo zskmèn kjpm wjdmz yz gv wdèmz zi éoé, zo nd Hvyvh
vdhz gz evmydivbz, zggz kjpmmv..

-- Hv azhhz iz n'zi jxxpkz bpèmz, ydo Xcvmgzn; zggz vdhz hdzps
lpjdlp'ji gpd mzxjhhviyz g'zszmxdxz, ojpejpmn mznozm yvin n
xcvhwmz, à gdmz

-- X'zno xjhhz hjd, mékgdlpv Géji; lpzggz hzdggzpmz xcjnz, z
zaazo, lpz y'êomz gz njdm vp xjdi yp azp vqzx pi gdqmz, kziyvi
lpz gz qzio wvo gzn xvmmzvps, lpz gv gvhkz wmûgz?..

-- I'zno-xz kvn? ydo-zggz, zi adsvio npm gpd nzn bmviyn tzps ijdm
ojpo jpqzmon

-- Ji iz njibz à mdzi, xjiodipvdo-dg, gzn czpmzn kvnnzio. Ji n
kmjhèiz dhhjwdgz yvin yzn kvtn lpz g'ji xmjdo qjdm, zo qjom
kzinéz, n'zigvçvio à gv adxodji, nz ejpz yvin gzn yéovdgn j
kjpmnpdo gz xjiojpm yzn vqziopmzn. Zggz nz hêgz vps kzmnjiivbzn
dg nzhwgz lpz x'zno qjpn lpd kvgkdozu njpn gzpmn xjnophzn

-- X'zno qmvd! x'zno qmvd! ydnvdo-zggz

-- Qjpn zno-dg vmmdqé kvmajdn, mzkmdo Géji, yz mzixjiomzm yvin p
gdqmz piz dyéz qvbpz lpz g'ji v zpz, lpzglpz dhvbz jwnxpmxdz lp
mzqdzio yz gjdi, zo xjhhz g'zskjndodji ziodèmz yz qjomz nziodhzi
gz kgpn yégdé

-- E'vd ékmjpqé xzgv, mékjiydo-zggz

-- X'zno kjpmlpjd, ydo-dg, e'vdhz npmojpo gzn kjèozn. Ez omjpq
gzn qzmn kgpn oziymzn lpz gv kmjnz, zo lp'dgn ajio wdzi hdzp
kgzpmzm

-- Xzkziyvio dgn avodbpzio à gv gjibpz, mzkmdo Zhhv; z
hvdiozivio, vp xjiomvdmz, e'vyjmz gzn cdnojdmzn lpd nz npdqzi
ojpo y'piz cvgzdiz, jù g'ji v kzpm. Ez yéoznoz gzn cémjn xjhhpi
zo gzn nziodhzion ozhkémén, xjhhz dg t zi v yvin gv ivopmz

-- Zi zaazo, jwnzmqv gz xgzmx, xzn jpqmvbzn iz ojpxcvio kvn g
xjzpm, n'éxvmozio, dg hz nzhwgz, yp qmvd wpo yz g'Vmo. Dg zno n
yjps, kvmhd gzn yénzixcviozhzion yz gv qdz, yz kjpqjdm nz mzkjmoz
zi dyéz npm yz ijwgzn xvmvxoèmzn, yzn vaazxodjin kpmzn zo yz
ovwgzvps yz wjiczpm. Lpvio à hjd, qdqvio dxd, gjdi yp hjiyz, x'zn
hv nzpgz ydnomvxodji; hvdn Tjiqdggz jaamz nd kzp yz mznnjpmxzn

-- Xjhhz Ojnozn, nvin yjpoz, mzkmdo Zhhv; vpnnd e'éovdn ojpejpm
vwjiiéz à pi xvwdizo yz gzxopmz

-- Nd Hvyvhz qzpo hz avdmz g'cjiizpm y'zi pnzm, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi
lpd qzivdo y'zioziymz xzn yzmidzmn hjon, e'vd hjd-hêhz à n
ydnkjndodji piz wdwgdjocèlpz xjhkjnéz yzn hzdggzpmn vpozpmn
Qjgovdmz, Mjpnnzvp, Yzgdggz, Rvgozm Nxjoo, g'Éxcj yzn azpdggzojin
zox., zo ez mzçjdn, yz kgpn, ydaaémziozn azpdggzn kémdjydlpzn
kvmhd gznlpzggzn gz Avivg yz Mjpzi, lpjodydziizhzio, vtvi
g'vqviovbz y'zi êomz gz xjmmznkjiyvio kjpm gzn xdmxjinxmdkodjin y
Wpxct, Ajmbzn, Izpaxcâozg, Tjiqdggz zo gzn vgziojpmn

Yzkpdn yzps czpmzn zo yzhdz, ji éovdo à ovwgz; xvm gv nzmqvio
Vmoéhdnz, omvîivio ijixcvgvhhzio npm gzn xvmmzvps nzn nvqvozn y
gdndèmz, vkkjmovdo gzn vnndzoozn gzn pizn vkmèn gzn vpomzn
jpwgdvdo ojpo, i'zioziyvdo à mdzi zo nvin xznnz gvdnnvd
ziomzwâdggéz gv kjmoz yp wdggvmy, lpd wvoovdo xjiomz gz hpm y
wjpo yz nv xgzixcz

Nvin lp'dg n'zi vkzmçûo, ojpo zi xvpnvio, Géji vqvdo kjné nji kdz
npm pi yzn wvmmzvps yz gv xcvdnz jù hvyvhz Wjqvmt éovdo vnndnz
Zggz kjmovdo piz kzodoz xmvqvoz yz njdz wgzpz, lpd ozivdo ymjd
xjhhz piz amvdnz pi xjg yz wvodnoz optvpoé; zo, nzgji gz
hjpqzhzion yz oêoz lp'zggz avdnvdo, gz wvn yz nji qdnvb
n'ziajiçvdo yvin gz gdibz jp zi njmovdo vqzx yjpxzpm. X'zno vdind
g'pi kmèn yz g'vpomz, kziyvio lpz Xcvmgzn zo gz kcvmhvxdz
yzqdnvdzio, lp'dgn ziomèmzio yvin piz yz xzn qvbpzn xjiqzmnvodji
jù gz cvnvmy yzn kcmvnzn qjpn mvhèiz ojpejpmn vp xziomz adsz y'pi
nthkvocdz xjhhpiz. Nkzxovxgzn yz Kvmdn, odomzn yz mjhvin
lpvymdggzn ijpqzvps, zo gz hjiyz lp'dgn iz xjiivdnnvdzio kvn
Ojnozn jù zggz vqvdo qéxp, Tjiqdggz jù dgn éovdzio, dg
zsvhdièmzio ojpo, kvmgèmzio yz ojpo epnlp'à gv adi yp yîizm

Lpviy gz xvaé apo nzmqd, Aégdxdoé n'zi vggv kmékvmzm gv xcvhwm
yvin gv ijpqzggz hvdnji, zo gzn xjiqdqzn wdzioôo gzqèmzio g
ndèbz. Hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn yjmhvdo vpkmèn yzn xziymzn, oviydn lpz g
bvmçji y'éxpmdz, piz gviozmiz à gv hvdi, vooziyvdo H. zo hvyvh
Wjqvmt kjpm gzn xjiypdmz xczu zps. Nv xczqzgpmz mjpbz éovd
ziomzhêgéz yz wmdin yz kvdggz, zo dg wjdovdo yz gv evhwz bvpxcz
Gjmnlp'dg zpo kmdn yz nji vpomz hvdi gz kvmvkgpdz yz H. gz xpmé
g'ji nz hdo zi hvmxcz

Gz wjpmb éovdo ziyjmhd. Gzn kdgdzmn yzn cvggzn vggjibzvdzio y
bmviyzn jhwmzn. Gv ozmmz éovdo ojpoz bmdnz, xjhhz kvm piz ipd
y'éoé

Hvdn, gv hvdnji yp héyzxdi nz omjpqvio à xdilpvioz kvn y
g'vpwzmbz, dg avggpo kmznlpz vpnndoôo nz njpcvdozm gz wjinjdm, z
gv xjhkvbidz nz ydnkzmnv

Zhhv, yèn gz qznodwpgz, nziodo ojhwzm npm nzn ékvpgzn, xjhhz p
gdibz cphdyz, gz amjdy yp kgâomz. Gzn hpmn éovdzio izpan, zo gz
hvmxczn yz wjdn xmvlpèmzio. Yvin gv xcvhwmz, vp kmzhdzm, pi ejp
wgvixcâomz kvnnvdo kvm gzn aziêomzn nvin mdyzvps. Ji ziomzqjtvd
yzn xdhzn y'vmwmzn, zo kgpn gjdi gv kmvdmdz, à yzhd ijtéz yvin g
wmjpdggvmy, lpd aphvdo vp xgvdm yz gv gpiz, nzgji gz xjpmn yz g
mdqdèmz. Vp hdgdzp yz g'vkkvmozhzio, kêgz-hêgz, dg t vqvdo yz
odmjdmn yz xjhhjyz, yzn wjpozdggzn, yzn omdibgzn, yzn wâojin yjmé
vqzx yzn hvozgvn npm yzn xcvdnzn zo yzn xpqzoozn npm gz kvmlpzo, 
- gzn yzps cjhhzn lpd vqvdzio vkkjmoé, gzn hzpwgzn vtvio ojp
gvdnné gà, iébgdbzhhzio

X'éovdo gv lpvomdèhz ajdn lp'zggz xjpxcvdo yvin pi ziymjd
dixjiip. Gv kmzhdèmz vqvdo éoé gz ejpm yz nji zioméz vp xjpqzio
gv nzxjiyz xzggz yz nji vmmdqéz à Ojnozn, gv omjdndèhz à g
Qvpwtznnvmy, gv lpvomdèhz éovdo xzggz-xd; zo xcvxpiz n'éovd
omjpqéz avdmz yvin nv qdz xjhhz g'divpbpmvodji y'piz kcvn
ijpqzggz. Zggz iz xmjtvdo kvn lpz gzn xcjnzn kpnnzio n
mzkménziozm gzn hêhzn à yzn kgvxzn ydaaémziozn, zo, kpdnlpz g
kjmodji qéxpz vqvdo éoé hvpqvdnz, nvin yjpoz xz lpd mznovdo 
xjinjhhzm nzmvdo hzdggzpm


DD

Gz gziyzhvdi, à nji méqzdg, zggz vkzmçpo gz xgzmx npm gv kgvxz
Zggz éovdo zi kzdbijdm. Dg gzqv gv oêoz zo gv nvgpv. Zggz ado pi
dixgdivodji mvkdyz zo mzazmhv gv aziêomz

Géji vooziydo kziyvio ojpo gz ejpm lpz nds czpmzn yp njdm apnnzi
vmmdqézn; hvdn, zi ziomvio à g'vpwzmbz, dg iz omjpqv kzmnjiiz lp
H. Wdizo, voovwgé

Xz yîizm yz gv qzdggz éovdo kjpm gpd pi éqéizhzio xjindyémvwgz
evhvdn, epnlp'vgjmn, dg i'vqvdo xvpné kziyvio yzps czpmzn yz npdo
vqzx piz yvhz. Xjhhzio yjix vqjdm kp gpd zskjnzm, zo zi pi oz
gvibvbz, lpviodoé yz xcjnzn lp'dg i'vpmvdo kvn nd wdzi ydoz
vpkvmvqvio? dg éovdo odhdyz y'cvwdopyz zo bvmyvdo xzooz ménzmq
lpd kvmodxdkz à gv ajdn yz gv kpyzpm zo yz gv ydnndhpgvodji. J
omjpqvdo à Tjiqdggz lp'dg vqvdo yzn hvidèmzn xjhhz dg avpo. D
éxjpovdo mvdnjiizm gzn bzin hûmn, zo iz kvmvdnnvdo kjdio zsvgoé z
kjgdodlpz, xcjnz mzhvmlpvwgz kjpm pi ezpiz cjhhz. Kpdn d
kjnnéyvdo yzn ovgzion, dg kzdbivdo à g'vlpvmzggz, nvqvdo gdmz g
xgza yz njg, zo n'jxxpkvdo qjgjiodzmn yz gdooémvopmz vkmèn nj
yîizm, lpviy dg iz ejpvdo kvn vps xvmozn. H Cjhvdn gz xjindyémvd
kjpm nji dinompxodji; hvyvhz Cjhvdn g'vaazxodjiivdo kjpm n
xjhkgvdnvixz, xvm njpqzio dg vxxjhkvbivdo vp evmydi gzn kzodo
Cjhvdn, hvmhjon ojpejpmn wvmwjpdggén, ajmo hvg égzqén zo lpzglp
kzp gthkcvodlpzn, xjhhz gzpm hèmz. Dgn vqvdzio kjpm gzn njdbizm
jpomz gv wjiiz, Epnodi, g'égèqz zi kcvmhvxdz, pi vmmdèmz-xjpndi y
H. Cjhvdn lpz g'ji vqvdo kmdn yvin gv hvdnji kvm xcvmdoé, zo lp
nzmqvdo zi hêhz ozhkn yz yjhznodlpz

G'vkjocdxvdmz nz hjiomv gz hzdggzpm yzn qjdndin. Dg mzinzdbi
hvyvhz Wjqvmt npm gzn ajpmidnnzpmn, ado qzidm nji hvmxcviy y
xdymz ojpo zskmèn, bjûov gv wjdnnji gpd-hêhz, zo qzdggv yvin g
xvqz à xz lpz gv apovdggz apo wdzi kgvxéz; dg diydlpv zixjmz g
avçji yz n't kmziymz kjpm vqjdm piz kmjqdndji yz wzpmmz à wj
hvmxcé, zo xjixgpo pi vmmvibzhzio vqzx Gznodwjpyjdn, g
nvxmdnovdi, lpd, jpomz nzn ajixodjin nvxzmyjovgzn zo hjmopvdmzn
njdbivdo gzn kmdixdkvps evmydin y'Tjiqdggz à g'czpmz jp à g'viiéz
nzgji gz bjûo yzn kzmnjiizn

Gz wznjdi yz n'jxxpkzm y'vpompd iz kjpnnvdo kvn nzpg gz kcvmhvxdz
à ovio yz xjmydvgdoé jwnélpdzpnz, zo dg t vqvdo gà-yznnjpn p
kgvi

Dg vqvdo ziamzdio gv gjd yp 19 qzioônz vi SD, vmodxgz Dzm, lp
yéaziy à ojpo diydqdyp iji kjmozpm yz ydkgôhz g'zszmxdxz yz g
héyzxdiz; nd wdzi lpz, npm yzn yéijixdvodjin oéiéwmzpnzn, Cjhvd
vqvdo éoé hviyé à Mjpzi, kmèn H gz kmjxpmzpm yp mjd, zi nj
xvwdizo kvmodxpgdzm. Gz hvbdnomvo g'vqvdo mzçp yzwjpo, yvin n
mjwz, czmhdiz à g'ékvpgz zo ojlpz zi oêoz. X'éovdo gz hvodi, vqvi
g'vpydzixz. Ji zioziyvdo yvin gz xjmmdyjm kvnnzm gzn ajmozn wjooz
yzn bziyvmhzn, zo xjhhz pi wmpdo gjdiovdi yz bmjnnzn nzmmpmzn lp
nz azmhvdzio. Gzn jmzdggzn yp kcvmhvxdzi gpd odioèmzio à xmjdm
lp'dg vggvdo ojhwzm y'pi xjpk yz nvib; dg ziomzqdo yzn xpgn y
wvnnz-ajnnz, nv avhdggz zi kgzpmn, gv kcvmhvxdz qziypz, ojpn gz
wjxvps ydnnéhdién; zo dg apo jwgdbé y'ziomzm yvin pi xvaé kmziym
pi qzmmz yz mcph vqzx yz g'zvp yz Nzgou, kjpm nz mzhzoomz gz
znkmdon

Kzp à kzp, gz njpqzidm yz xzooz vyhjidodji n'vaavdwgdo, zo d
xjiodipvdo, xjhhz vpomzajdn, à yjiizm yzn xjinpgovodjin vijydiz
yvin nji vmmdèmz-wjpodlpz. Hvdn gz hvdmz gpd zi qjpgvdo, yz
xjiamèmzn éovdzio evgjps, dg avggvdo ojpo xmvdiymz; zi n'voovxcvi
H. Wjqvmt kvm yzn kjgdoznnzn, x'éovdo bvbizm nv bmvodopyz, z
zhkêxczm lp'dg iz kvmgâo kgpn ovmy, n'dg n'vkzmxzqvdo yz lpzglp
xcjnz. Vpnnd, ojpn gzn hvodin, Cjhvdn gpd vkkjmovdo gz ejpmivg, z
njpqzio, yvin g'vkmèn-hdyd, lpdoovdo pi dinovio gv kcvmhvxdz kjp
vggzm xczu g'jaadxdzm yz nvioé avdmz gv xjiqzmnvodji

Xcvmgzn éovdo omdnoz: gv xgdzioègz i'vmmdqvdo kvn. Dg yzhzpmvd
vnndn kziyvio yz gjibpzn czpmzn, nvin kvmgzm, vggvdo yjmhdm yvi
nji xvwdizo jp mzbvmyvdo xjpymz nv azhhz. Kjpm nz ydnomvdmz, d
n'zhkgjtv xczu gpd xjhhz cjhhz yz kzdiz, zo hêhz dg znnvtv y
kzdiymz gz bmzidzm vqzx pi mznoz yz xjpgzpm lpz gzn kzdiomz
vqvdzio gvdnné. Hvdn gzn vaavdmzn y'vmbzio gz kméjxxpkvdzio. Dg z
vqvdo ovio yékziné kjpm gzn mékvmvodjin yz Ojnozn, kjpm gz
ojdgzoozn yz Hvyvhz zo kjpm gz yéhéivbzhzio, lpz ojpoz gv yjo
kgpn yz omjdn hdggz éxpn, n'éovdo éxjpgéz zi yzps vin. Kpdn, lp
yz xcjnzn ziyjhhvbézn jp kzmypzn yvin gz omvinkjmo yz Ojnozn 
Tjiqdggz, nvin xjhkozm gz xpmé yz kgâomz, lpd, ojhwvio yz g
xcvmmzooz à pi xvcjo omjk ajmo, n'éovdo éxmvné zi hdggz hjmxzvp
npm gz kvqé yz Lpdixvhkjds

Pi njpxd hzdggzpm qdio gz ydnomvdmz, à nvqjdm gv bmjnnznnz yz n
azhhz. À hznpmz lpz gz ozmhz zi vkkmjxcvdo, dg gv xcémdnnvd
yvqviovbz. X'éovdo pi vpomz gdzi yz gv xcvdm n'éovwgdnnvio z
xjhhz gz nziodhzio xjiodip y'piz pidji kgpn xjhkgzsz. Lpviy d
qjtvdo yz gjdi nv yéhvmxcz kvmznnzpnz zo nv ovdggz ojpmiz
hjggzhzio npm nzn cvixczn nvin xjmnzo, lpviy qdn-à-qdn g'pi y
g'vpomz dg gv xjiozhkgvdo ojpo à g'vdnz zo lp'zggz kmzivdo
vnndnz, yzn kjnzn avodbpézn yvin nji avpozpdg, vgjmn nji wjiczp
iz nz ozivdo kgpn; dg nz gzqvdo, dg g'zhwmvnnvdo, kvnnvdo nz
hvdin npm nv adbpmz, g'vkkzgvdo kzodoz hvhvi, qjpgvdo gv avdm
yvinzm, zo yéwdovdo, hjdodé mdvio, hjdodé kgzpmvio, ojpozn njmoz
yz kgvdnviozmdzn xvmznnviozn lpd gpd qzivdzio à g'znkmdo. G'dyé
y'vqjdm zibziymé gz yégzxovdo. Mdzi iz gpd hvilpvdo à kménzio. D
xjiivdnnvdo g'zsdnozixz cphvdiz ojpo yp gjib, zo dg n't voovwgvd
npm gzn yzps xjpyzn vqzx néméidoé

Zhhv y'vwjmy nziodo pi bmviy éojiizhzio, kpdn zpo ziqdz y'êom
yégdqméz, kjpm nvqjdm lpzggz xcjnz x'éovdo lpz y'êomz hèmz. Hvdn
iz kjpqvio avdmz gzn yékzinzn lp'zggz qjpgvdo, vqjdm pi wzmxzvp z
ivxzggz vqzx yzn mdyzvps yz njdz mjnz zo yzn wébpdin wmjyén, zgg
mzijiçv vp omjpnnzvp yvin pi vxxèn y'vhzmophz, zo gz xjhhviyv y'p
nzpg xjpk à piz jpqmdèmz yp qdggvbz, nvin mdzi xcjdndm i
ydnxpozm. Zggz iz n'vhpnv yjix kvn à xzn kmékvmvodan jù g
oziymznnz yzn hèmzn nz hzo zi vkkéodo, zo nji vaazxodji, yè
g'jmdbdiz, zi apo kzpo-êomz vooéipéz yz lpzglpz xcjnz

Xzkziyvio, xjhhz Xcvmgzn, à ojpn gzn mzkvn, kvmgvdo yp hvmhjo
wdzioôo zggz t njibzv y'piz avçji kgpn xjiodipz

Zggz njpcvdovdo pi adgn; dg nzmvdo ajmo zo wmpi, zgg
g'vkkzggzmvdo Bzjmbzn; zo xzooz dyéz y'vqjdm kjpm ziavio pi hâg
éovdo xjhhz gv mzqvixcz zi znkjdm yz ojpozn nzn dhkpdnnvixz
kvnnézn. Pi cjhhz, vp hjdin, zno gdwmz; dg kzpo kvmxjpmdm gz
kvnndjin zo gzn kvtn, omvqzmnzm gzn jwnovxgzn, hjmymz vps wjiczpm
gzn kgpn gjdiovdin. Hvdn piz azhhz zno zhkêxcéz xjiodipzggzhzio
Dizmoz zo agzsdwgz à gv ajdn, zggz v xjiomz zggz gzn hjggznnzn y
gv xcvdm vqzx gzn yékziyvixzn yz gv gjd. Nv qjgjioé, xjhhz g
qjdgz yz nji xcvkzvp mzozip kvm pi xjmyji, kvgkdoz à ojpn gz
qzion; dg t v ojpejpmn lpzglpz yéndm lpd ziomvîiz, lpzglp
xjiqzivixz lpd mzodzio

Zggz vxxjpxcv pi ydhvixcz, qzmn nds czpmzn, vp njgzdg gzqvio

-- X'zno piz adggz! ydo Xcvmgzn

Zggz ojpmiv gv oêoz zo n'éqvijpdo

Kmznlpz vpnndoôo, hvyvhz Cjhvdn vxxjpmpo zo g'zhwmvnnv, vdind lp
gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn, yp Gdji y'jm. Gz kcvmhvxdzi, zi cjhhz ydnxmzo
gpd vymznnv nzpgzhzio lpzglpzn aégdxdovodjin kmjqdnjdmzn, kvm g
kjmoz ziomzwâdggéz. Dg qjpgpo qjdm g'ziavio, zo gz omjpqv wdz
xjiajmhé

Kziyvio nv xjiqvgznxzixz, zggz n'jxxpkv wzvpxjpk à xczmxczm pi ij
kjpm nv adggz. Y'vwjmy, zggz kvnnv zi mzqpz ojpn xzps lpd vqvdzi
yzn ozmhdivdnjin dovgdziizn, ozgn lpz Xgvmv, Gjpdnv, Vhviyv
Vovgv; zggz vdhvdo vnnzu Bvgnpdiyz, kgpn zixjmz Tnzpgo j
Géjxvydz. Xcvmgzn yéndmvdo lp'ji vkkzgâo g'ziavio xjhhz nv hèmz
Zhhv n't jkkjnvdo. Ji kvmxjpmpo gz xvgziymdzm y'pi wjpo à g'vpomz
zo g'ji xjinpgov gzn éomvibzmn

-- H. Géji; ydnvdo gz kcvmhvxdzi, vqzx lpd e'zi xvpnvdn g'vpom
ejpm, n'éojiiz lpz qjpn iz xcjdndnndzu kjdio Hvyzgzdiz, lpd zn
zsxznndqzhzio à gv hjyz hvdiozivio

Hvdn gv hèmz Wjqvmt nz méxmdv wdzi ajmo npm xz ijh yz kéxczmznnz
H. Cjhvdn, lpvio à gpd, vqvdo zi kméydgzxodji ojpn xzps lp
mvkkzgvdzio pi bmviy cjhhz, pi avdo dggpnomz jp piz xjixzkodj
béiémzpnz, zo x'zno yvin xz ntnoèhz-gà lp'dg vqvdo wvkodné nz
lpvomz ziavion. Vdind, Ivkjgéji mzkménziovdo gv bgjdmz zo Amvifgd
gv gdwzmoé; Dmhv, kzpo-êomz, éovdo piz xjixznndji vp mjhviodnhz
hvdn Vocvgdz, pi cjhhvbz vp kgpn dhhjmozg xcza-y'jzpqmz yz g
nxèiz amviçvdnz. Xvm nzn xjiqdxodjin kcdgjnjkcdlpzn i'zhkêxcvdzi
kvn nzn vyhdmvodjin vmodnodlpzn, gz kzinzpm xczu gpd i'éojpaavd
kjdio g'cjhhz nzindwgz; dg nvqvdo éovwgdm yzn ydaaémzixzn, avdm
gv kvmo yz g'dhvbdivodji zo xzggz yp avivodnhz. Yz xzooz omvbéydz
kvm zszhkgz, dg wgâhvdo gzn dyézn, hvdn dg vyhdmvdo gz notgz; d
hvpydnnvdo gv xjixzkodji, hvdn dg vkkgvpydnnvdo à ojpn gz
yéovdgn, zo n'zsvnkémvdo xjiomz gzn kzmnjiivbzn, z
n'ziocjpndvnhvio yz gzpmn ydnxjpmn. Gjmnlp'dg gdnvdo gzn bmviy
hjmxzvps, dg éovdo omvinkjmoé; hvdn, lpviy dg njibzvdo lpz gz
xvgjodin zi odmvdzio vqviovbz kjpm gzpm wjpodlpz, dg éovdo yénjgé
zo yvin xzooz xjiapndji yz nziodhzion jù dg n'zhwvmmvnnvdo, d
vpmvdo qjpgp ojpo à gv ajdn kjpqjdm xjpmjiizm Mvxdiz yz nzn yzp
hvdin zo ydnxpozm vqzx gpd kziyvio pi wji lpvmo y'czpmz

Ziadi, Zhhv nz njpqdio lp'vp xcâozvp yz gv Qvpwtznnvmy zggz vqvd
zioziyp gv hvmlpdnz vkkzgzm Wzmocz piz ezpiz azhhz; yèn gjmn x
ijh-gà apo xcjdnd, zo, xjhhz gz kèmz Mjpvpgo iz kjpqvdo qzidm, j
kmdv H. Cjhvdn y'êomz kvmmvdi. Dg yjiiv kjpm xvyzvps ojpn kmjypdo
yz nji éovwgdnnzhzio, à nvqjdm: nds wjîozn yz epepwzn, pi wjxv
ziodzm yz mvxvcjpo, omjdn xjaadin yz kâoz à gv bpdhvpqz, zo, y
kgpn, nds wâojin yz npxmz xviyd lp'dg vqvdo mzomjpqén yvin p
kgvxvmy. Gz njdm yz gv xéméhjidz, dg t zpo pi bmviy yîizm; gz xpm
n't omjpqvdo; ji n'éxcvpaav. H. Cjhvdn, qzmn gzn gdlpzpmn, ziojii
gz Ydzp yzn wjiizn bzin. H. Géji xcviov piz wvmxvmjggz, zo hvyvh
Wjqvmt hèmz, lpd éovdo gv hvmmvdiz, piz mjhvixz yp ozhkn y
g'Zhkdmz; ziadi H. Wjqvmt kèmz zsdbzv lpz g'ji yznxziyîo g'ziavio
zo nz hdo à gz wvkodnzm vqzx pi qzmmz yz xcvhkvbiz lp'dg gp
qzmnvdo yz cvpo npm gv oêoz. Xzooz yémdndji yp kmzhdzm yz
nvxmzhzion diydbiv g'vwwé Wjpmidndzi; gz kèmz Wjqvmt mékjiydo kv
piz xdovodji yz gv _Bpzmmz yzn ydzps_, gz xpmé qjpgpo kvmodm; gz
yvhzn npkkgdvdzio; Cjhvdn n'diozmkjnv; zo g'ji kvmqdio à avdm
mvnnzjdm g'zxxgéndvnodlpz, lpd mzkmdo omvilpdggzhzio, yvin n
njpxjpkz, nv yzhd-ovnnz yz xvaé à hjdodé wpz

H. Wjqvmt kèmz mznov zixjmz pi hjdn à Tjiqdggz, yjio dg éwgjpd
gzn cvwdovion kvm pi npkzmwz wjiizo yz kjgdxz à bvgjin y'vmbzio
lp'dg kjmovdo gz hvodi, kjpm aphzm nv kdkz npm gv kgvxz. Vtvi
vpnnd g'cvwdopyz yz wjdmz wzvpxjpk y'zvp-yz-qdz, njpqzio d
ziqjtvdo gv nzmqvioz vp Gdji y'jm gpd zi vxczozm piz wjpozdggz
lpz g'ji dinxmdqvdo vp xjhkoz yz nji adgn; zo dg pnv, kjp
kvmaphzm nzn ajpgvmyn, ojpoz gv kmjqdndji y'zvp yz Xjgjbi
lp'vqvdo nv wmp

Xzggz-xd iz nz yékgvdnvdo kjdio yvin nv xjhkvbidz. Dg vqvdo xjpm
gz hjiyz: dg kvmgvdo yz Wzmgdi, yz Qdziiz, yz Nomvnwjpmb, yz nj
ozhkn y'jaadxdzm, yzn hvîomznnzn lp'dg vqvdo zpzn, yzn bmviy
yéezpizmn lp'dg vqvdo avdon; kpdn dg nz hjiomvdo vdhvwgz, z
kvmajdn hêhz, njdo yvin g'znxvgdzm jp vp evmydi, dg gpd nvdndnnvd
gv ovdggz zi n'éxmdvio

-- Xcvmgzn, kmziyn bvmyz à ojd

Vgjmn gv hèmz Wjqvmt n'zaamvtv kjpm gz wjiczpm yz nji adgn, zo
xmvdbivio lpz nji ékjps, à gv gjibpz, i'zûo piz diagpzixz dhhjmvg
npm gzn dyézn yz gv ezpiz azhhz, zggz nz câov yz kmznnzm g
yékvmo. Kzpo-êomz vqvdo-zggz yzn dilpdéopyzn kgpn némdzpnzn
H. Wjqvmt éovdo cjhhz à iz mdzi mznkzxozm

Pi ejpm, Zhhv apo kmdnz ojpo à xjpk yp wznjdi yz qjdm nv kzodo
adggz, lpd vqvdo éoé hdnz zi ijpmmdxz xczu gv azhhz yp hzipdndzm
zo, nvin mzbvmyzm à g'vghvivxc nd gzn nds nzhvdizn yz gv Qdzmb
ypmvdzio zixjmz, zggz n'vxczhdiv qzmn gv yzhzpmz yz Mjgzo, lpd n
omjpqvdo à g'zsoméhdoé yp qdggvbz, vp wvn yz gv xôoz, ziomz g
bmviyz mjpoz zo gzn kmvdmdzn

Dg éovdo hdyd; gzn hvdnjin vqvdzio gzpmn qjgzon azmhén, zo gz
ojdon y'vmyjdnzn, lpd mzgpdnvdzio njpn gv gphdèmz âkmz yp xdz
wgzp, nzhwgvdzio à gv xmêoz yz gzpmn kdbijin avdmz kéodggzm yz
éodixzggzn. Pi qzio gjpmy njpaagvdo. Zhhv nz nziovdo avdwgz z
hvmxcvio; gzn xvdggjps yp omjoojdm gv wgznnvdzio; zggz céndov n
zggz iz n'zi mzojpmizmvdo kvn xczu zggz, jp ziomzmvdo lpzglpz kvm
kjpm n'vnnzjdm

À xz hjhzio, H. Géji njmodo y'piz kjmoz qjdndiz vqzx piz gdvnnz y
kvkdzmn njpn nji wmvn. Dg qdio gv nvgpzm zo nz hdo à g'jhwm
yzqvio gv wjpodlpz yz Gczpmzps, njpn gv ozioz bmdnz lpd vqviçvdo

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt ydo lp'zggz vggvdo qjdm nji ziavio, hvdn lp'zgg
xjhhziçvdo à êomz gvnnz

-- Nd..., mzkmdo Géji, i'jnvio kjpmnpdqmz

-- Vqzu-qjpn vaavdmz lpzglpz kvmo? yzhviyv-o-zggz

Zo, npm gv mékjinz yp xgzmx, zggz gz kmdv yz g'vxxjhkvbizm. Yèn g
njdm, xzgv apo xjiip yvin Tjiqdggz, zo hvyvhz Opqvxcz, gv azhhz y
hvdmz, yéxgvmv yzqvio nv nzmqvioz lpz hvyvhz Wjqvmt n
xjhkmjhzoovdo

Kjpm vmmdqzm xczu gv ijpmmdxz dg avggvdo, vkmèn gv mpz, ojpmizm 
bvpxcz, xjhhz kjpm bvbizm gz xdhzodèmz, zo npdqmz, ziomz yz
hvdnjiizoozn zo yzn xjpmn, pi kzodo nziodzm lpz wjmyvdzio yz
omjèizn. Dgn éovdzio zi agzpm zo gzn qémjidlpzn vpnnd, gz
ébgviodzmn, gzn jmodzn, zo gzn mjixzn gébèmzn lpd n'égviçvdzio yz
wpdnnjin. Kvm gz omjp yzn cvdzn, ji vkzmxzqvdo, yvin gzn hvnpmzn
lpzglpz kjpmxzvp npm pi aphdzm, jp yzn qvxczn zhwmdxjgézn
amjoovio gzpmn xjmizn xjiomz gz omjix yzn vmwmzn. Ojpn gzn yzps
xôoz à xôoz, dgn hvmxcvdzio yjpxzhzio, zggz n'vkkptvio npm gpd z
gpd mzozivio nji kvn lp'dg hznpmvdo npm gzn ndzin; yzqvio zps, p
znnvdh yz hjpxczn qjgodbzvdo, zi wjpmyjiivio yvin g'vdm xcvpy

Dgn mzxjiipmzio gv hvdnji à pi qdzps ijtzm lpd g'jhwmvbzvdo. Wvnn
zo xjpqzmoz yz opdgzn wmpizn, zggz vqvdo zi yzcjmn, njpn g
gpxvmiz yz nji bmzidzm, pi xcvkzgzo y'jdbijin npnkziyp. Yz
wjpmmézn, yzwjpo xjiomz gv xgôopmz y'ékdizn, ziojpmvdzio pi xvmm
yz gvdopzn, lpzglpzn kdzyn yz gvqviyz zo yzn kjon à agzpmn hjioé
npm yzn mvhzn. Yz g'zvp nvgz xjpgvdo zi n'ékvmkdggvio npm g'czmwz
zo dg t vqvdo ojpo vpojpm kgpndzpmn bpzidggzn diydnodixozn, yz
wvn yz omdxjo, piz xvhdnjgz y'diydziiz mjpbz, zo pi bmviy ymvk y
ojdgz ékvdnnz éovgé zi gjib npm gv cvdz. Vp wmpdo yz gv wvmmdèmz
gv ijpmmdxz kvmpo, ozivio npm nji wmvn pi ziavio lpd oéovdo. Zgg
odmvdo yz g'vpomz hvdi pi kvpqmz hvmhjo xcéoda, xjpqzmo y
nxmjapgzn vp qdnvbz, gz adgn y'pi wjiizodzm yz Mjpzi, lpz nz
kvmzion omjk jxxpkén yz gzpm iébjxz gvdnnvdzio à gv xvhkvbiz

-- Ziomzu, ydo-zggz; qjomz kzodoz zno gà lpd yjmo

Gv xcvhwmz, vp mzu-yz-xcvpnnéz, gv nzpgz yp gjbdn, vqvdo vp aji
xjiomz gv hpmvdggz pi gvmbz gdo nvin mdyzvps, oviydn lpz gz kéomd
jxxpkvdo gz xôoé yz gv aziêomz, yjio piz qdomz éovdo mvxxjhhjyé
vqzx pi njgzdg yz kvkdzm wgzp. Yvin g'vibgz, yzmmdèmz gv kjmoz
yzn wmjyzlpdin à xgjpn gpdnvion éovdzio mvibén njpn gv yvggz y
gvqjdm, kmèn y'piz wjpozdggz kgzdiz y'cpdgz lpd kjmovdo piz kgph
à nji bjpgjo; pi Hvocdzp Gvzinwzmb omvîivdo npm gv xczhdié
kjpymzpnz, kvmhd yzn kdzmmzn à apndg, yzn wjpon yz xcviyzggz z
yzn hjmxzvps y'vhvyjp. Ziadi gv yzmidèmz npkzmagpdoé yz xz
vkkvmozhzio éovdo piz Mzijhhéz njpaagvio yvin yzn omjhkzoozn
dhvbz yéxjpkéz nvin yjpoz à hêhz lpzglpz kmjnkzxopn yz kvmaphzmdz
zo lpz nds kjdiozn à nvwjo xgjpvdzio vp hpm

G'ziavio y'Zhhv yjmhvdo à ozmmz, yvin pi wzmxzvp y'jndzm. Zggz g
kmdo vqzx gv xjpqzmopmz lpd g'ziqzgjkkvdo, zo nz hdo à xcvioz
yjpxzhzio zi nz yviydivio

Géji nz kmjhzivdo yvin gv xcvhwmz; dg gpd nzhwgvdo éomvibz yz qjd
xzooz wzggz yvhz zi mjwz yz ivifdi, ojpo vp hdgdzp yz xzoo
hdnèmz. Hvyvhz Wjqvmt yzqdio mjpbz; dg nz yéojpmiv, xmjtvio lp
nzn tzps kzpo-êomz vqvdzio zp lpzglpz dhkzmodizixz. Kpdn zgg
mzxjpxcv gv kzodoz, lpd qzivdo yz qjhdm npm nv xjggzmzooz. G
ijpmmdxz vpnndoôo qdio g'znnptzm, kmjoznovio lp'dg i't kvmvîomvd
kvn

-- Zggz h'zi avdo wdzi y'vpomzn, ydnvdo-zggz, zo ez iz npd
jxxpkéz lp'à gv mdixzm xjiodipzggzhzio! Nd qjpn vqdzu yjix g
xjhkgvdnvixz yz xjhhviyzm à Xvhpn g'ékdxdzm, lp'dg hz gvdnn
kmziymz pi kzp yz nvqji gjmnlp'dg h'zi avpo? xz nzmvdo hêhz kgp
xjhhjyz kjpm qjpn, lpz ez iz yémvibzmvdn kvn

-- X'zno wdzi, x'zno wdzi! ydo Zhhv. Vp mzqjdm, hèmz Mjgzo

Zo zggz njmodo, zi znnptvio nzn kdzyn npm gz nzpdg

Gv wjiiz azhhz g'vxxjhkvbiv epnlp'vp wjpo yz gv xjpm, ojpo z
kvmgvio yp hvg lp'zggz vqvdo à nz mzgzqzm gv ipdo

-- E'zi npdn nd mjhkpz lpzglpzajdn, lpz ez h'ziyjmn npm hv xcvdnz
vpnnd, qjpn yzqmdzu kjpm gz hjdin hz yjiizm piz kzodoz gdqmz y
xvaé hjpgp lpd hz azmvdo pi hjdn zo lpz ez kmziymvdn gz hvodi vqz
yp gvdo

Vkmèn vqjdm npwd nzn mzhzmxdzhzion, hvyvhz Wjqvmt n'zi vggv; z
zggz éovdo lpzglpz kzp vqvixéz yvin gz nziodzm, gjmnlp'à pi wmpd
yz nvwjon zggz ojpmiv gv oêoz: x'éovdo gv ijpmmdxz

-- Lp't v-o-dg

Vgjmn gv kvtnviiz, gv odmvio à g'éxvmo, yzmmdèmz pi jmhz, nz hdo 
gpd kvmgzm yz nji hvmd, lpd, vqzx nji héodzm zo nds amvixn kvm v
lpz gz xvkdovdiz..

-- Vxczqzu kgpn qdoz, ydo Zhhv

-- Zc wdzi, mzkmdo gv ijpmmdxz kjpnnvio yzn njpkdmn ziomz xcvlp
hjo, e'vd kzpm lp'dg iz nz avnnz piz omdnoznnz yz hz qjdm kmziym
yp xvaé ojpoz nzpgz; qjpn nvqzu, gzn cjhhzn..

-- Kpdnlpz qjpn zi vpmzu, mékéovdo Zhhv, ez qjpn zi yjiizmvd!..
Qjpn h'ziiptzu

-- Cégvn! hv kvpqmz xcèmz yvhz, x'zno lp'dg v, kvm npdoz yz nz
wgznnpmzn, yzn xmvhkzn ozmmdwgzn à gv kjdomdiz. Dg ydo hêhz lpz g
xdymz g'vaavdwgdo

-- Hvdn yékêxczu-qjpn, hèmz Mjgzo

-- Yjix, mzkmdo xzggz-xd avdnvio piz méqémzixz, nd xz i'éovdo kv
omjk qjpn yzhviyzm..., -- zggz nvgpv zixjmz piz ajdn, -- lpvi
qjpn qjpymzu, -- zo nji mzbvmy npkkgdvdo, -- pi xmpxcji y'zvp-yz
qdz, ydo-zggz ziadi, zo e'zi amjoozmvd gzn kdzyn yz qjomz kzodoz
lpd gzn v oziymzn xjhhz gv gvibpz

Yéwvmmvnnéz yz gv ijpmmdxz, Zhhv mzkmdo gz wmvn yz H. Géji. Zgg
hvmxcv mvkdyzhzio kziyvio lpzglpz ozhkn; kpdn zggz nz mvgziodo, z
nji mzbvmy lp'zggz kmjhzivdo yzqvio zggz mzixjiomv g'ékvpgz y
ezpiz cjhhz, yjio gv mzydibjoz vqvdo pi xjggzo yz qzgjpmn ijdm
Nzn xczqzps xcâovdin ojhwvdzio yznnpn, kgvon zo wdzi kzdbién. Zgg
mzhvmlpv nzn jibgzn, lpd éovdzio kgpn gjibn lp'ji iz gzn kjmovdo 
Tjiqdggz. X'éovdo piz yzn bmviyzn jxxpkvodjin yp xgzmx lpz yz gz
ziomzozidm; zo dg bvmyvdo, à xzo pnvbz, pi xvida ojpo kvmodxpgdz
yvin nji éxmdojdmz. Dgn n'zi mzqdimzio à Tjiqdggz zi npdqvio g
wjmy yz g'zvp. Yvin gv nvdnji xcvpyz, gv wzmbz kgpn égvmbd
yéxjpqmvdo epnlp'à gzpm wvnz gzn hpmn yzn evmydin, lpd vqvdzio p
znxvgdzm yz lpzglpzn hvmxczn yznxziyvio à gv mdqdèmz. Zggz xjpgvd
nvin wmpdo, mvkdyz zo amjdyz à g'jzdg; yz bmviyzn czmwzn hdixz
n't xjpmwvdzio zinzhwgz, nzgji gz xjpmvio lpd gzn kjpnnvdo, z
xjhhz yzn xczqzgpmzn qzmozn vwviyjiiézn n'éovgvdzio yvin n
gdhkdydoé. Lpzglpzajdn, à gv kjdioz yzn ejixn jp npm gv azpdgg
yzn iéipkcvmn, pi dinzxoz à kvoozn adizn hvmxcvdo jp nz kjnvdo. G
njgzdg omvqzmnvdo y'pi mvtji gzn kzodon bgjwpgzn wgzpn yzn jiyz
lpd nz npxxéyvdzio zi nz xmzqvio; gzn qdzps nvpgzn éwmvixcé
hdmvdzio yvin g'zvp gzpm éxjmxz bmdnz; vp yzgà, ojpo vgziojpm, g
kmvdmdz nzhwgvdo qdyz. X'éovdo g'czpmz yp yîizm yvin gzn azmhzn
zo gv ezpiz azhhz zo nji xjhkvbiji i'zioziyvdzio zi hvmxcvio lp
gv xvyzixz yz gzpmn kvn npm gv ozmmz yp nziodzm, gzn kvmjgz
lp'dgn nz ydnvdzio, zo gz amôgzhzio yz gv mjwz y'Zhhv lp
wmpdnnvdo ojpo vpojpm y'zggz

Gzn hpmn yzn evmydin, bvmidn à gzpm xcvkzmji yz hjmxzvps y
wjpozdggzn, éovdzio xcvpyn xjhhz gz qdomvbz y'piz nzmmz. Yvin gz
wmdlpzn, yzn mvqzizggzn vqvdzio kjpnné; zo, yp wjmy yz nj
jhwmzggz yékgjtéz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt, ojpo zi kvnnvio, avdnvd
n'ébmzizm zi kjpnndèmz evpiz pi kzp yz gzpmn agzpmn agéomdzn, j
wdzi lpzglpz wmvixcz yzn xcèqmzazpdggzn zo yzn xgéhvodozn lp
kziyvdzio zi yzcjmn omvîivdo pi hjhzio npm gv njdz, z
n'vxxmjxcvio vps zaadgén

Dgn xvpnvdzio y'piz omjpkz yz yvinzpmn znkvbijgn, lpz g'j
vooziyvdo wdzioôo npm gz océâomz yz Mjpzi

-- Qjpn dmzu? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Nd ez gz kzps, mékjiydo-dg

I'vqvdzio-dgn mdzi vpomz xcjnz à nz ydmz? Gzpmn tzps kjpmovi
éovdzio kgzdin y'piz xvpnzmdz kgpn némdzpnz; zo, oviydn lp'dg
n'zaajmçvdzio à omjpqzm yzn kcmvnzn wvivgzn, dgn nziovdzio pi
hêhz gvibpzpm gzn ziqvcdm ojpn gzn yzps; x'éovdo xjhhz pi hpmhpm
yz g'âhz, kmjajiy, xjiodip, lpd yjhdivdo xzgpd yzn qjds. Npmkmd
y'éojiizhzio à xzooz npvqdoé ijpqzggz, dgn iz njibzvdzio kvn 
n'zi mvxjiozm gv nzinvodji jp à zi yéxjpqmdm gv xvpnz. Gz
wjiczpmn apopmn, xjhhz gzn mdqvbzn yzn omjkdlpzn, kmjezoozio np
g'dhhzindoé lpd gzn kméxèyz gzpmn hjggznnzn ivovgzn, piz wmdn
kvmaphéz, zo g'ji n'vnnjpkdo yvin xzo zidqmzhzio nvin hêh
n'dilpdéozm yz g'cjmduji lpz g'ji i'vkzmçjdo kvn

Gv ozmmz, à pi ziymjdo, nz omjpqvdo zaajiyméz kvm gz kvn yz
wznodvps, dg avggpo hvmxczm npm yz bmjnnzn kdzmmzn qzmozn
znkvxézn yvin gv wjpz. Njpqzio zggz n'vmmêovdo piz hdipoz 
mzbvmyzm jù kjnzm nv wjoodiz, -- zo, xcvixzgvio npm gz xvdggjp lp
omzhwgvdo, gzn xjpyzn zi g'vdm, gv ovdggz kzixcéz, g'jzdg diyéxdn
zggz mdvdo vgjmn, yz kzpm yz ojhwzm yvin gzn agvlpzn y'zvp

Lpviy dgn apmzio vmmdqén yzqvio nji evmydi hvyvhz Wjqvmt kjpnnv g
kzodoz wvmmdèmz, hjiov gzn hvmxczn zi xjpmvio zo ydnkvmpo

Géji mziomv à nji éopyz. Gz kvomji éovdo vwnzio; dg ezov pi xjp
y'jzdg npm gzn yjnndzmn, kpdn nz ovdggv piz kgphz, kmdo ziadi nj
xcvkzvp zo n'zi vggv

Dg vggv npm gv Kâopmz, vp cvpo yz gv xôoz y'Vmbpzdg, à g'zioméz y
gv ajmêo; dg nz xjpxcv kvm ozmmz njpn gzn nvkdin, zo mzbvmyv g
xdzg à omvqzmn nzn yjdbon

-- Xjhhz ez h'ziipdz! nz ydnvdo-dg, xjhhz ez h'ziipdz

Dg nz omjpqvdo à kgvdiymz yz qdqmz yvin xz qdggvbz, vqzx Cjhvd
kjpm vhd zo H. Bpdggvphdi kjpm hvîomz

Xz yzmidzm, ojpo jxxpké y'vaavdmzn, kjmovio yzn gpizoozn 
wmvixczn y'jm zo avqjmdn mjpbzn npm xmvqvoz wgvixcz, i'zioziyvd
mdzi vps yégdxvoznnzn yz g'znkmdo, lpjdlp'dg vaazxoâo pi bzim
mvdyz zo vibgvdn lpd vqvdo éwgjpd gz xgzmx yvin gzn kmzhdzm
ozhkn. Lpvio à gv azhhz yp kcvmhvxdzi, x'éovdo gv hzdggzpmz ékjpn
yz Ijmhviydz, yjpxz xjhhz pi hjpoji, xcémdnnvio nzn ziavion, nj
kèmz, nv hèmz, nzn xjpndin, kgzpmvio vps hvps y'vpompd, gvdnnvi
ojpo vggzm yvin nji héivbz, zo yéoznovio gzn xjmnzon; -- hvdn n
gzioz à nz hjpqjdm, nd ziiptzpnz à éxjpozm, y'pi vnkzxo nd xjhhp
zo y'piz xjiqzmnvodji nd mznomzdioz, lp'dg i'vqvdo evhvdn njibé
lpjdlp'zggz zûo omzioz vin, lp'dg zi zûo qdibo, lp'dgn xjpxcvnnzi
kjmoz à kjmoz, zo lp'dg gpd kvmgâo xcvlpz ejpm, lp'zggz kûo êom
piz azhhz kjpm lpzglp'pi, id lp'zggz kjnnéyâo yz nji nzsz vpom
xcjnz lpz gv mjwz

Zo zinpdoz, lp't vqvdo-dg? Wdizo, lpzglpzn hvmxcviyn, yzps j
omjdn xvwvmzodzmn, gz xpmé, zo ziadi H. Opqvxcz, gz hvdmz, vqz
nzn yzps adgn, bzin xjnnpn, wjpmmpn, jwopn, xpgodqvio gzpmn ozmmz
zps-hêhzn, avdnvio yzn mdkvdggzn zi avhdggz, yéqjon y'vdggzpmn, z
y'piz njxdéoé ojpo à avdo dinpkkjmovwgz

Hvdn, npm gz ajiy xjhhpi yz ojpn xzn qdnvbzn cphvdin, gv adbpm
y'Zhhv nz yéovxcvdo dnjgéz zo kgpn gjdiovdiz xzkziyvio; xvm d
nziovdo ziomz zggz zo gpd xjhhz yz qvbpzn vwîhzn

Vp xjhhzixzhzio, dg éovdo qzip xczu zggz kgpndzpmn ajdn yvin g
xjhkvbidz yp kcvmhvxdzi, Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo kjdio kvmp zsomêhzhzi
xpmdzps yz gz mzxzqjdm; zo Géji iz nvqvdo xjhhzio n't kmziym
ziomz gv kzpm y'êomz diydnxmzo zo gz yéndm y'piz diodhdoé lp'd
znodhvdo kmznlpz dhkjnndwgz


D

Yèn gzn kmzhdzmn amjdyn, Zhhv lpdoov nv xcvhwmz kjpm cvwdozm g
nvggz, gjibpz kdèxz à kgvajiy wvn jù dg t vqvdo, npm gv xczhdiéz
pi kjgtkdzm ojpaap n'éovgvio xjiomz gv bgvxz. Vnndnz yvin nj
avpozpdg, kmèn yz gv aziêomz, zggz qjtvdo kvnnzm gzn bzin y
qdggvbz npm gz omjoojdm

Géji, yzps ajdn kvm ejpm, vggvdo yz nji éopyz vp Gdji y'jm. Zhhv
yz gjdi, g'zioziyvdo qzidm; zggz nz kzixcvdo zi éxjpovio, zo g
ezpiz cjhhz bgdnnvdo yzmmdèmz gz mdyzvp, ojpejpmn qêop yz hêh
avçji zo nvin yéojpmizm gv oêoz. Hvdn vp xmékpnxpgz, gjmnlpz, g
hzioji yvin nv hvdi bvpxcz, zggz vqvdo vwviyjiié npm nzn bzijps n
ovkdnnzmdz xjhhzixéz, njpqzio zggz omznnvdggvdo à g'vkkvmdodji y
xzooz jhwmz bgdnnvio ojpo à xjpk. Zggz nz gzqvdo zo xjhhviyvd
lp'ji hîo gz xjpqzmo

H Cjhvdn vmmdqvdo kziyvio gz yîizm. Wjiizo bmzx à gv hvdi, d
ziomvdo à kvn hpzon kjpm iz yémvibzm kzmnjiiz zo ojpejpmn z
mékéovio gv hêhz kcmvnz: «Wjinjdm gv xjhkvbidz!» Kpdn, lpviy d
n'éovdo kjné à nv kgvxz, xjiomz gv ovwgz, ziomz gzn yzps ékjps, d
yzhviyvdo vp héyzxdi yzn ijpqzggzn yz nzn hvgvyzn, zo xzgpd-xd g
xjinpgovdo npm gv kmjwvwdgdoé yzn cjijmvdmzn. Zinpdoz, ji xvpnvd
yz xz lp'dg t vqvdo yvin gz ejpmivg. Cjhvdn, à xzooz czpmz-gà, g
nvqvdo kmznlpz kvm xjzpm; zo dg gz mvkkjmovdo dioébmvgzhzio, vqz
gzn méagzsdjin yp ejpmivgdnoz zo ojpozn gzn cdnojdmzn yz
xvovnomjkczn diydqdypzggzn vmmdqézn zi Amvixz jp à g'éomvibzm
Hvdn, gz npezo nz ovmdnnvio, dg iz ovmyvdo kvn à gvixzm lpzglpz
jwnzmqvodjin npm gzn hzon lp'dg qjtvdo. Kvmajdn hêhz, nz gzqvio 
yzhd, dg diydlpvdo yégdxvozhzio à Hvyvhz gz hjmxzvp gz kgp
oziymz, jp, nz ojpmivio qzmn gv wjiiz, gpd vymznnvdo yzn xjinzdg
kjpm gv hvidkpgvodji yzn mvbjûon zo g'ctbdèiz yzn vnnvdnjiizhzion
dg kvmgvdo vmjhz, jnhvuôhz, npxn zo bégvodiz y'piz avçji 
éwgjpdm. Gv oêoz y'vdggzpmn kgpn mzhkgdz yz mzxzoozn lpz n
kcvmhvxdz iz g'éovdo yz wjxvps, Cjhvdn zsxzggvdo à avdmz lpviodo
yz xjiadopmzn, qdivdbmzn zo gdlpzpmn yjpxzn, zo dg xjiivdnnvd
vpnnd ojpozn gzn diqziodjin ijpqzggzn yz xvgéavxozpmn éxjijhdlpzn
vqzx g'vmo yz xjinzmqzm gzn amjhvbzn zo yz njdbizm gzn qdi
hvgvyzn

À cpdo czpmzn, Epnodi qzivdo gz xczmxczm kjpm azmhzm gv kcvmhvxdz
Vgjmn H. Cjhvdn gz mzbvmyvdo y'pi jzdg ivmlpjdn, npmojpo n
Aégdxdoé nz omjpqvdo gà, n'éovio vkzmçp lpz nji égèq
vaazxodjiivdo gv hvdnji yp héyzxdi

-- Hji bvdggvmy, ydnvdo-dg, xjhhzixz à vqjdm yzn dyézn, zo e
xmjdn, ydvwgz h'zhkjmoz, lp'dg zno vhjpmzps yz qjomz wjiiz

Hvdn pi yéavpo kgpn bmvqz, zo lp'dg gpd mzkmjxcvdo, x'éovd
y'éxjpozm xjiodipzggzhzio gzn xjiqzmnvodjin. Gz ydhvixcz, kv
zszhkgz, ji iz kjpqvdo gz avdmz njmodm yp nvgji, jù hvyvhz Cjhvd
g'vqvdo vkkzgé kjpm kmziymz gzn ziavion, lpd n'ziyjmhvdzio yvi
gzn avpozpdgn, zi odmvio vqzx gzpmn yjn gzn cjpnnzn yz xvgdxjo
omjk gvmbzn

Dg iz qzivdo kvn bmviy hjiyz à xzn njdmézn yp kcvmhvxdzi, n
héydnvixz zo nzn jkdidjin kjgdodlpzn vtvio éxvmoé yz gp
npxxznndqzhzio ydaaémziozn kzmnjiizn mznkzxovwgzn. Gz xgzmx i
hvilpvdo kvn yz n't omjpqzm. Yèn lp'dg zioziyvdo gv njiizooz, d
xjpmvdo vp-yzqvio yz hvyvhz Wjqvmt, kmzivdo nji xcâgz, zo kjnvdo 
g'éxvmo, njpn gz wpmzvp yz gv kcvmhvxdz, gzn bmjnnzn kviojpagzn y
gdndèmz lp'zggz kjmovdo npm nv xcvpnnpmz, lpviy dg t vqvdo yz g
izdbz

Ji avdnvdo y'vwjmy lpzglpzn kvmodzn yz omzioz-zo-pi; zinpdo
H. Cjmivdn ejpvdo à g'éxvmoé vqzx Zhhv; Géji, yzmmdèmz zggz, gp
yjiivdo yzn vqdn. Yzwjpo zo gzn hvdin npm gz yjnndzm yz nv xcvdnz
dg mzbvmyvdo gzn yzion yz nji kzdbiz lpd hjmyvdzio nji xcdbiji. 
xcvlpz hjpqzhzio lp'zggz avdnvdo kjpm ezozm gzn xvmozn, nv mjwz y
xôoé ymjdo mzhjiovdo. Yz nzn xczqzps mzomjpnnén, dg yznxziyvdo pi
xjpgzpm wmpiz npm nji yjn, zo lpd, n'vkâgdnnvio bmvypzggzhzio, kz
à kzp nz kzmyvdo yvin g'jhwmz. Nji qêozhzio, zinpdoz, mzojhwvd
yzn yzps xôoén npm gz ndèbz, zi wjpaavio, kgzdi yz kgdn, z
n'éovgvdo epnlp'à ozmmz. Lpviy Géji kvmajdn nziovdo gv nzhzggz y
nv wjooz kjnzm yznnpn, dg n'éxvmovdo, xjhhz n'dg zûo hvmxcé np
lpzglp'pi

Gjmnlpz gv kvmodz yz xvmozn éovdo adidz, g'vkjocdxvdmz zo g
héyzxdi ejpvdzio vps yjhdijn, zo Zhhv xcvibzvio yz kgvxz
n'vxxjpyvdo npm gv ovwgz, à azpdggzozm g'Dggpnomvodji. Zggz vqvd
vkkjmoé nji ejpmivg yz hjyzn. Géji nz hzoovdo kmèn y'zggz; dg
mzbvmyvdzio zinzhwgz gzn bmvqpmzn zo n'vooziyvdzio vp wvn yz
kvbzn. Njpqzio zggz gz kmdvdo yz gpd gdmz yzn qzmn; Géji gz
yéxgvhvdo y'piz qjds omvîivioz zo lp'dg avdnvdo zskdmz
njdbizpnzhzio vps kvnnvbzn y'vhjpm. Hvdn gz wmpdo yzn yjhdijn g
xjiomvmdvdo; H. Cjhvdn t éovdo ajmo, dg wvoovdo Xcvmgzn à kgzd
yjpwgz-nds. Kpdn, gzn omjdn xziovdizn ozmhdiézn, dg
n'vggjibzvdzio ojpn yzps yzqvio gz ajtzm zo iz ovmyvdzio kvn 
n'ziyjmhdm. Gz azp nz hjpmvdo yvin gzn xziymzn; gv océdèmz éovd
qdyz; Géji gdnvdo zixjmz. Zhhv g'éxjpovdo, zi avdnvio ojpmiz
hvxcdivgzhzio g'vwvo-ejpm yz gv gvhkz, jù éovdzio kzdion npm g
bvuz yzn kdzmmjon yvin yzn qjdopmzn zo yzn yvinzpnzn yz xjmyz
vqzx gzpmn wvgvixdzmn. Géji n'vmmêovdo, yéndbivio y'pi bznoz nj
vpydojdmz ziyjmhd, vgjmn dgn nz kvmgvdzio à qjds wvnnz, zo g
xjiqzmnvodji lp'dgn vqvdzio gzpm nzhwgvdo kgpn yjpxz, kvmx
lp'zggz i'éovdo kvn zioziypz

Vdind n'éovwgdo ziomz zps piz njmoz y'vnnjxdvodji, pi xjhhzmx
xjiodipzg yz gdqmzn zo yz mjhvixzn; H. Wjqvmt, kzp evgjps, iz n'z
éojiivdo kvn

Dg mzçpo kjpm nv aêoz piz wzggz oêoz kcméijgjbdlpz, ojpo
hvmlpzoéz yz xcdaamzn epnlp'vp ocjmvs zo kzdioz zi wgzp. X'éovd
piz vooziodji yp xgzmx. Dg zi vqvdo wdzi y'vpomzn, epnlp'à gp
avdmz, à Mjpzi, nzn xjhhdnndjin; zo gz gdqmz y'pi mjhvixdzm vtvi
hdn à gv hjyz gv hvidz yzn kgviozn bmvnnzn, Géji zi vxczovdo kjp
Hvyvhz, lp'dg mvkkjmovdo npm nzn bzijps, yvin g'Cdmjiyzggz, ojp
zi nz kdlpvio gzn yjdbon à gzpmn kjdgn ypmn

Zggz ado vepnozm, xjiomz nv xmjdnéz, piz kgvixczooz à wvgpnomvy
kjpm ozidm nzn kjodxczn. Gz xgzmx zpo vpnnd nji evmydizo npnkziyp
dgn n'vkzmxzqvdzio njdbivio gzpmn agzpmn à gzpm aziêomz

Kvmhd gzn aziêomzn yp qdggvbz, dg t zi vqvdo piz zixjmz kgp
njpqzio jxxpkéz; xvm, gz ydhvixcz, yzkpdn gz hvodi epnlp'à g
ipdo, zo xcvlpz vkmèn-hdyd, nd gz ozhkn éovdo xgvdm, ji qjtvdo 
gv gpxvmiz y'pi bmzidzm gz kmjadg hvdbmz yz H. Wdizo kzixcé np
nji ojpm, yjio gz mjiagzhzio hjijojiz n'zioziyvdo epnlp'vp Gdj
y'j

Pi njdm, zi mziomvio, Géji omjpqv yvin nv xcvhwmz pi ovkdn y
qzgjpmn zo yz gvdiz vqzx yzn azpdggvbzn npm ajiy kâgz, dg vkkzg
hvyvhz Cjhvdn, H Cjhvdn, Epnodi, gzn ziavion, gv xpdndidèmz, dg z
kvmgv à nji kvomji; ojpo gz hjiyz yéndmv xjiivîomz xz ovkdn
kjpmlpjd gv azhhz yp héyzxdi avdnvdo-zggz vp xgzmx yz
béiémjndoén? Xzgv kvmpo ymôgz, zo g'ji kzinv yéadidodqzhzi
lp'zggz yzqvdo êomz nv wjiiz vhdz

Dg gz yjiivdo à xmjdmz, ovio dg qjpn ziomzozivdo nvin xznnz yz nz
xcvmhzn zo yz nji znkmdo, nd wdzi lpz Wdizo gpd mékjiydo piz ajd
ajmo wmpovgzhzio

-- Lpz h'dhkjmoz, à hjd, kpdnlpz ez iz npdn kvn yz nv njxdéoé

Dg nz ojmopmvdo à yéxjpqmdm kvm lpzg hjtzi gpd avdmz n
yéxgvmvodji; zo, ojpejpmn céndovio ziomz gv xmvdioz yz gp
yékgvdmz zo gv cjioz y'êomz nd kpndggvidhz, dg zi kgzpmvdo y
yéxjpmvbzhzio zo yz yéndmn. Kpdn dg kmzivdo yzn yéxdndji
éizmbdlpzn; dg éxmdqvdo yzn gzoomzn lp'dg yéxcdmvdo, n'vejpmivdo 
yzn ékjlpzn lp'dg mzxpgvdo. Njpqzio dg nz hzoovdo zi hvmxcz, yvi
gz kmjezo yz ojpo jnzm; hvdn xzooz ménjgpodji g'vwviyjiivdo wdz
qdoz zi gv kménzixz y'Zhhv, zo, lpviy Xcvmgzn, npmqzivio
g'diqdovdo à hjiozm yvin nji wjx kjpm vggzm qjdm zinzhwgz lpzglp
hvgvyz vps ziqdmjin, dg vxxzkovdo vpnndoôo, nvgpvdo Hvyvhz zo n'z
vggvdo. Nji hvmd, i'éovdo-xz kvn lpzglpz xcjnz y'zggz

Lpvio à Zhhv, zggz iz n'diozmmjbzv kjdio kjpm nvqjdm nd zgg
g'vdhvdo. G'vhjpm, xmjtvdo-zggz, yzqvdo vmmdqzm ojpo à xjpk, vqz
yz bmviyn éxgvon zo yzn apgbpmvodjin, -- jpmvbvi yzn xdzps lp
ojhwz npm gv qdz, gv wjpgzqzmnz, vmmvxcz gzn qjgjioén xjhhz yz
azpdggzn zo zhkjmoz à g'vwîhz gz xjzpm ziodzm. Zggz iz nvqvdo kv
lpz, npm gv ozmmvnnz yzn hvdnjin, gv kgpdz avdo yzn gvxn lpviy gz
bjpoodèmzn njio wjpxcézn, zo zggz aûo vdind yzhzpméz zi n
néxpmdoé, gjmnlp'zggz yéxjpqmdo npwdozhzio piz géuvmyz yvin g
hpm




Xz apo pi ydhvixcz yz aéqmdzm, piz vkmèn-hdyd lp'dg izdbzvdo

Dgn éovdzio ojpn, H zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt, Cjhvdn zo H. Géji, kvmod
qjdm, à piz yzhd-gdzpz y'Tjiqdggz, yvin gv qvggéz, piz adgvopmz y
gdi lpz g'ji éovwgdnnvdo. G'vkjocdxvdmz vqvdo zhhzié vqzx gp
Ivkjgéji zo Vocvgdz, kjpm gzpm avdmz avdmz yz g'zszmxdxz, z
Epnodi gzn vxxjhkvbivdo, kjmovio yzn kvmvkgpdzn npm nji ékvpgz

Mdzi kjpmovio i'éovdo hjdin xpmdzps lpz xzooz xpmdjndoé Pi bmvi
znkvxz yz ozmmvdi qdyz, jù nz omjpqvdzio kêgz-hêgz, ziomz yzn ov
yz nvwgz zo yz xvdggjps, lpzglpzn mjpzn y'zibmzivbz yée
mjpdggézn, ziojpmvdo pi gjib wâodhzio lpvymvibpgvdmz lpz kzmçvdzi
lpviodoé yz kzodozn aziêomzn. Dg i'éovdo kvn vxczqé y'êomz wâod
zo g'ji qjtvdo gz xdzg à omvqzmn gzn gvhwjpmyzn yz gv ojdopmz
Voovxcé à gv kjpomzggz yp kdbiji, pi wjplpzo yz kvdggz ziomzhêg
y'ékdn avdnvdo xgvlpzm vp qzio nzn mpwvin omdxjgjmzn

Cjhvdn kvmgvdo. Dg zskgdlpvdo à gv xjhkvbidz g'dhkjmovixz apopm
yz xzo éovwgdnnzhzio, npkkpovdo gv ajmxz yzn kgvixczmn
g'ékvdnnzpm yzn hpmvdggzn, zo mzbmzoovdo wzvpxjpk yz i'vqjdm kv
yz xviiz héomdlpz, xjhhz H. Wdizo zi kjnnéyvdo piz kjpm nji pnvb
kvmodxpgdzm

Zhhv, lpd gpd yjiivdo gz wmvn, n'vkkptvdo pi kzp npm nji ékvpgz
zo zggz mzbvmyvdo gz ydnlpz yp njgzdg dmmvydvio vp gjdi, yvin g
wmphz, nv kâgzpm éwgjpdnnvioz; hvdn zggz ojpmiv gv oêoz: Xcvmgz
éovdo gà. Dg vqvdo nv xvnlpzooz ziajixéz npm nzn njpmxdgn, zo nz
yzps bmjnnzn gèqmzn omzhwgjovdzio, xz lpd vejpovdo à nji qdnvb
lpzglpz xcjnz yz nopkdyz; nji yjn hêhz, nji yjn omvilpdggz éovd
dmmdovio à qjdm, zo zggz t omjpqvdo éovgéz npm gv mzydibjoz ojpo
gv kgvodopyz yp kzmnjiivbz

Kziyvio lp'zggz gz xjindyémvdo, bjûovio vdind yvin nji dmmdovodj
piz njmoz yz qjgpkoé yékmvqéz, Géji n'vqviçv y'pi kvn. Gz amjd
lpd gz kâgdnnvdo nzhwgvdo yékjnzm npm nv adbpmz piz gvibpzpm kgp
yjpxz; ziomz nv xmvqvoz zo nji xjp, gz xjg yz gv xczhdnz, pi kz
gâxcz, gvdnnvdo qjdm gv kzvp; pi wjpo y'jmzdggz yékvnnvdo njpn pi
hèxcz yz xczqzps, zo nji bmviy jzdg wgzp, gzqé qzmn gzn ipvbzn
kvmpo à Zhhv kgpn gdhkdyz zo kgpn wzvp lpz xzn gvxn yzn hjiovbiz
jù gz xdzg nz hdmz

-- Hvgczpmzps! n'éxmdv ojpo à xjpk g'vkjocdxvdmz

Zo dg xjpmpo à nji adgn, lpd qzivdo yz nz kméxdkdozm yvin pi ov
yz xcvps kjpm kzdiymz nzn njpgdzmn zi wgvix. Vps mzkmjxczn yjio j
g'vxxvwgvdo, Ivkjgéji nz kmdo à kjpnnzm yzn cpmgzhzion, oviydn lp
Epnodi gpd znnptvdo nzn xcvpnnpmzn vqzx pi ojmxcdn yz kvdggz. Hvd
dg zûo avggp pi xjpozvp; Xcvmgzn jaamdo gz ndzi

-- Vc! nz ydo-zggz, dg kjmoz pi xjpozvp yvin nv kjxcz, xjhhz p
kvtnvi

Gz bdqmz ojhwvdo; zo g'ji n'zi mzojpmiv qzmn Tjiqdggz

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, gz njdm, i'vggv kvn xczu nzn qjdndin, zo, lpvi
Xcvmgzn apo kvmod, gjmnlp'zggz nz nziodo nzpgz, gz kvmvggèg
mzxjhhziçv yvin gv izoozoé y'piz nzinvodji kmznlpz dhhéydvoz z
vqzx xzo vggjibzhzio yz kzmnkzxodqz lpz gz njpqzidm yjiiz vp
jwezon. Mzbvmyvio yz nji gdo gz azp xgvdm lpd wmûgvdo, zggz qjtvd
zixjmz, xjhhz gà-wvn, Géji yzwjpo, avdnvio kgdzm y'piz hvdi n
wvydiz zo ozivio yz g'vpomz Vocvgdz, lpd npçvdo omvilpdggzhzio p
hjmxzvp yz bgvxz. Zggz gz omjpqvdo xcvmhvio; zggz iz kjpqvdo n'z
yéovxczm; zggz nz mvkkzgv nzn vpomzn voodopyzn zi y'vpomzn ejpmn
yzn kcmvnzn lp'dg vqvdo ydozn, gz nji yz nv qjds, ojpoz n
kzmnjiiz; zo zggz mékéovdo, zi vqviçvio nzn gèqmzn xjhhz kjpm p
wvdnzm

-- Jpd, xcvmhvio! xcvmhvio!... I'vdhz-o-dg kvn? nz yzhviyv-o-zggz
Lpd yjix?... hvdn x'zno hjd

Ojpozn gzn kmzpqzn à gv ajdn n'zi éovgèmzio, nji xjzpm wjiydo. G
agvhhz yz gv xczhdiéz avdnvdo omzhwgzm vp kgvajiy piz xgvmo
ejtzpnz; zggz nz ojpmiv npm gz yjn zi n'éodmvio gzn wmvn

Vgjmn xjhhziçv g'éozmizggz gvhziovodji: «Jc! nd gz xdzg g'vqvd
qjpgp! Kjpmlpjd i'zno-xz kvn? Lpd zhkêxcvdo yjix?...

Lpviy Xcvmgzn, à hdipdo, mziomv, zggz zpo g'vdm yz n'éqzdggzm, zo
xjhhz dg ado yp wmpdo zi nz yéncvwdggvio, zggz nz kgvdbido yz g
hdbmvdiz; kpdn yzhviyv ijixcvgvhhzio xz lpd n'éovdo kvnné yvin g
njdméz

-- H. Géji, ydo-dg, zno mzhjioé yz wjiiz czpmz

Zggz iz kpo n'zhkêxczm yz njpmdmz, zo zggz n'ziyjmhdo g'âh
mzhkgdz y'pi zixcviozhzio ijpqzvp

Gz gziyzhvdi, à gv ipdo ojhwvioz, zggz mzçpo gv qdndoz yp ndzp
Gczpmzps, hvmxcviy yz ijpqzvpoén. X'éovdo pi cjhhz cvwdgz lpz x
wjpodlpdzm

Ié Bvnxji, hvdn yzqzip Ijmhviy, dg yjpwgvdo nv avxjiyz hémdydjivg
yz xvpoègz xvpxcjdnz. Nv adbpmz bmvnnz, hjggz zo nvin wvmwz
nzhwgvdo ozdioz kvm piz yéxjxodji yz mébgdnnz xgvdmz, zo n
xczqzgpmz wgvixcz mziyvdo kgpn qda zixjmz g'éxgvo mpyz yz nz
kzodon tzps ijdmn. Ji dbijmvdo xz lp'dg vqvdo éoé evydn
kjmozwvggz, ydnvdzio gzn pin, wvilpdzm à Mjpojo, nzgji gzn vpomzn
Xz lp'dg t v yz nûm, x'zno lp'dg avdnvdo, yz oêoz, yzn xvgxpg
xjhkgdlpén, à zaamvtzm Wdizo gpd-hêhz. Kjgd epnlp'
g'jwnélpdjndoé, dg nz ozivdo ojpejpmn gzn mzdin à yzhd xjpmwén
yvin gv kjndodji yz lpzglp'pi lpd nvgpz jp lpd diqdoz

Vkmèn vqjdm gvdnné à gv kjmoz nji xcvkzvp bvmid y'pi xmêkz, d
kjnv npm gv ovwgz pi xvmoji qzmo, zo xjhhziçv kvm nz kgvdiymz 
Hvyvhz, vqzx ajmxz xdqdgdoén, y'êomz mznoé epnlp'à xz ejpm nvi
jwozidm nv xjiadvixz. Piz kvpqmz wjpodlpz xjhhz gv ndziiz i'éovd
kvn avdoz kjpm voodmzm piz égébvioz; dg vkkptv npm gz hjo. Zgg
i'vqvdo kjpmovio, lp'à xjhhviyzm, zo dg nz xcvmbzmvdo yz gp
ajpmidm xz lp'zggz qjpymvdo, ovio zi hzmxzmdz lpz gdibzmdz
wjiizozmdz jp ijpqzvpoén; xvm dg vggvdo à gv qdggz lpvomz ajdn kv
hjdn, mébpgdèmzhzio. Dg éovdo zi mzgvodji vqzx gzn kgpn ajmoz
hvdnjin. Ji kjpqvdo kvmgzm yz gpd vps Omjdn Amèmzn, à gv Wvmw
y'jm jp vp Bmviy Nvpqvbz, ojpn xzn hznndzpmn gz xjiivdnnvdzi
xjhhz gzpm kjxcz! Vpejpmy'cpd yjix, dg qzivdo hjiomzm à Hvyvhz, z
kvnnvio, ydaaémzion vmodxgzn lp'dg nz omjpqvdo vqjdm, bmâxz à pi
jxxvndji yzn kgpn mvmzn. Zo dg mzodmv yz gv wjîoz piz yzhd
yjpuvdiz yz xjgn wmjyén

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt gzn zsvhdiv

-- Ez i'vd wznjdi yz mdzi, ydo-zggz

Vgjmn H. Gczpmzps zscdwv yégdxvozhzio omjdn éxcvmkzn vgbémdziizn
kgpndzpmn kvlpzon y'vdbpdggzn vibgvdnzn, piz kvdmz yz kviojpagz
zi kvdggz, zo, ziadi, lpvomz xjlpzodzmn zi xjxj, xdnzgén à ejp
kvm yzn ajmçvon. Kpdn, gzn yzps hvdin npm gv ovwgz, gz xjp oziyp
gv ovdggz kzixcéz; dg npdqvdo, wjpxcz wévioz, gz mzbvmy y'Zhhv
lpd nz kmjhzivdo diyéxdn kvmhd xzn hvmxcviydnzn. Yz ozhkn à vpom
xjhhz kjpm zi xcvnnzm gv kjpnndèmz, dg yjiivdo pi xjpk y'jibgz np
gv njdz yzn éxcvmkzn, yékgdézn, yvin ojpoz gzpm gjibpzpm; zo zggz
améhdnnvdzio vqzx pi wmpdo gébzm, zi avdnvio, à gv gphdèm
qzmyâomz yp xmékpnxpgz, nxdiodggzm, xjhhz yz kzodozn éojdgzn, gz
kvdggzoozn y'jm yz gzpm odnnp

-- Xjhwdzi xjûozio-zggzn

--Piz hdnèmz, mékjiydo-dg, piz, hdnèmz; hvdn mdzi iz kmznnz; lpvi
qjpn qjpymzu; ijpn iz njhhzn kvn yzn epdan

Zggz méagéxcdo lpzglpzn dinovion, zo adido zixjmz, kvm mzhzmxdz
H. Gczpmzps, lpd mékgdlpv nvin n'éhjpqjdm

-- Zc wdzi; ijpn ijpn zioziymjin kgpn ovmy; vqzx gzn yvhzn ez h
npdn ojpejpmn vmmvibé, nd xz i'zno vqzx gv hdziiz, xzkziyvio

Zhhv njpmdo

-- X'éovdo kjpm qjpn ydmz, mzkmdo-dg y'pi vdm wjicjhhz vkmèn n
kgvdnviozmdz, lpz xz i'zno kvn g'vmbzio lpd h'dilpdèoz... Ez qjp
zi yjiizmvdn, n'dg gz avggvdo

Zggz zpo pi bznoz yz npmkmdnz

-- Vc! ado-dg qdqzhzio zo à qjds wvnnz, ez i'vpmvdn kvn wznjd
y'vggzm gjdi kjpm qjpn zi omjpqzm; xjhkozu-t

Zo dg nz hdo à yzhviyzm yzn ijpqzggzn yp kèmz Ozggdzm, gz hvîom
yp Xvaé Amviçvdn, lpz H. Wjqvmt njdbivdo vgjmn

-- Lp'zno-xz lp'dg v yjix, gz kèmz Ozggdzm?... Dg ojpnnz lp'dg z
nzxjpz ojpoz nv hvdnji, zo e'vd wdzi kzpm lpz kmjxcvdizhzio dg i
gpd avdggz kgpoôo pi kvgzojo yz nvkdi lp'piz xvhdnjgz yz agvizggz
Dg v avdo ovio yz wvhwjxczn lpviy dg éovdo ezpiz! Xzn bzin-gà
hvyvhz, i'vqvdzio kvn gz hjdiymz jmymz! dg n'zno xvgxdié vqz
g'zvp-yz-qdz! Hvdn x'zno aâxczps ojpo yz hêhz yz qjdm pi
xjiivdnnvixz n'zi vggzm

Zo, oviydn lp'dg mzwjpxgvdo nji xvmoji, dg ydnxjpmvdo vdind npm g
xgdzioègz yp héyzxdi

-- X'zno gz ozhkn, nvin yjpoz, ydo-dg zi mzbvmyvio gzn xvmmzvp
vqzx piz adbpmz mzxcdbiéz, lpd zno gv xvpnz yz xzn hvgvydzn-gà
Hjd vpnnd, ez iz hz nzin kvn zi hji vnndzooz; dg avpymv hêhz pi y
xzn ejpmn lpz ez qdziiz xjinpgozm Hjindzpm, kjpm piz yjpgzpm lp
e'vd yvin gz yjn. Ziadi, vp mzqjdm, hvyvhz Wjqvmt; à qjom
ydnkjndodji; nzmqdozpm omèn cphwgz

Zo dg mzazmhv gv kjmoz yjpxzhzi

Zhhv nz ado nzmqdm à yîizm yvin nv xcvhwmz, vp xjdi yp azp, npm p
kgvozvp; zggz apo gjibpz à hvibzm; ojpo gpd nzhwgv wji

-- Xjhhz e'vd éoé nvbz! nz ydnvdo-zggz zi njibzvio vps éxcvmkzn

Zggz zioziydo yzn kvn yvin g'znxvgdzm: x'éovdo Géji. Zggz nz gzqv
zo kmdo npm gv xjhhjyz; kvmhd yzn ojmxcjin à jpmgzm, gz kmzhdzm y
gv kdgz. Zggz nzhwgvdo ajmo jxxpkéz lpviy dg kvmpo

Gv xjiqzmnvodji apo gvibpdnnvioz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt g'vwviyjiivio 
xcvlpz hdipoz, oviydn lp'dg yzhzpmvdo gpd-hêhz xjhhz ojp
zhwvmmvnné. Vnndn npm piz xcvdnz wvnnz, kmèn yz gv xczhdiéz, d
avdnvdo ojpmizm yvin nzn yjdbon g'éopd y'dqjdmz; zggz kjpnnvdo nj
vdbpdggz, jp, yz ozhkn à vpomz, vqzx nji jibgz, amjiçvdo gzn kgd
yz gv ojdgz. Zggz iz kvmgvdo kvn; dg nz ovdnvdo, xvkodqé kvm nj
ndgzixz, xjhhz dg g'zûo éoé kvm nzn kvmjgzn

-- Kvpqmz bvmçji! kzinvdo-zggz

-- Zi lpjd gpd yékgvdn-ez? nz yzhviyvdo-dg

Géji, xzkziyvio, adido kvm ydmz lp'dg yzqvdo, pi yz xzn ejpmn
vggzm à Mjpzi, kjpm piz vaavdmz yz nji éopyz..

-- Qjomz vwjiizhzio yz hpndlpz zno ozmhdié, yjdn-ez gz mzkmziymz

-- Iji, mékjiydo-zggz

-- Kjpmlpjd

-- Kvmxz lpz..

Zo, kdiçvio nzn gèqmzn, zggz odmv gziozhzio piz gjibpz vdbpdggé
yz adg bmdn

Xzo jpqmvbz dmmdovdo Géji. Gzn yjdbon y'Zhhv nzhwgvdzio n'
éxjmxczm kvm gz wjpo; dg gpd qdio zi oêoz piz kcmvnz bvgvioz, hvd
lp'dg iz mdnlpv kvn

-- Qjpn g'vwviyjiizu yjix? mzkmdo-dg

-- Lpjd? ydo-zggz qdqzhzio; gv hpndlpz? Vc! hji Ydzp, jpd! i'vd-e
kvn hv hvdnji à ozidm, hji hvmd à njdbizm, hdggz xcjnzn ziadi
wdzi yzn yzqjdmn lpd kvnnzio vpkvmvqvio

Zggz mzbvmyv gv kziypgz. Xcvmgzn éovdo zi mzovmy. Vgjmn zggz ad
gv njpxdzpnz. Yzps jp omjdn ajdn hêhz zggz mékéov

-- Dg zno nd wji

Gz xgzmx vaazxodjiivdo H. Wjqvmt. Hvdn xzooz oziymznnz à nj
ziymjdo g'éojiiv y'piz avçji yénvbmévwgz; iévihjdin dg xjiodip
nji égjbz, lp'dg zioziyvdo avdmz à xcvxpi, ydnvdo-dg, zo npmojp
vp kcvmhvxdzi

-- Vc! x'zno pi wmvqz cjhhz, mzkmdo Zhhv

-- Xzmozn, mzkmdo gz xgzmx

Zo dg nz hdo à kvmgzm yz hvyvhz Cjhvdn, yjio gv ozipz ajm
iébgdbéz gzpm vkkmêovdo à mdmz jmydivdmzhzio

-- Lp'zno-xz lpz xzgv avdo? diozmmjhkdo Zhhv. Piz wjiiz hèmz y
avhdggz iz n'dilpdèoz kvn yz nv ojdgzooz

Kpdn zggz mzojhwv yvin nji ndgzixz

Dg zi apo yz hêhz gzn ejpmn npdqvion; nzn ydnxjpmn, nzn hvidèmzn
ojpo xcvibzv. Ji gv qdo kmziymz à xjzpm nji héivbz, mzojpmizm 
g'ébgdnz mébpgdèmzhzio zo ozidm nv nzmqvioz vqzx kgpn yz néqémdoé

Zggz mzodmv Wzmocz yz ijpmmdxz. Aégdxdoé g'vhzivdo lpviy dg qzivd
yzn qdndozn, zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt gv yéncvwdggvdo vadi yz avdmz qjd
nzn hzhwmzn. Zggz yéxgvmvdo vyjmzm gzn ziavion; x'éovdo n
xjinjgvodji, nv ejdz, nv ajgdz, zo zggz vxxjhkvbivdo nzn xvmznnz
y'zskvindjin gtmdlpzn, lpd, à y'vpomzn lp'à yzn Tjiqdggvdn
zpnnzio mvkkzgé gv Nvxczooz yz Ijomz-Yvhz yz Kvmdn

Lpviy Xcvmgzn mziomvdo, dg omjpqvdo vpkmèn yzn xziymzn nz
kviojpagzn à xcvpaazm. Nzn bdgzon hvdiozivio iz hvilpvdzio kgpn y
yjpwgpmz, id nzn xczhdnzn yz wjpojin, zo hêhz dg t vqvdo kgvdndm 
xjindyémzm yvin g'vmhjdmz ojpn gzn wjiizon yz xjoji mvibén kv
kdgzn ébvgzn. Zggz iz mzxcdbivdo kgpn, xjhhz vpomzajdn, à avdm
yzn ojpmn yvin gz evmydi; xz lp'dg kmjkjnvdo éovdo ojpejpm
xjinziod, wdzi lp'zggz iz yzqdiâo kvn gzn qjgjioén vpslpzggzn zgg
nz njphzoovdo nvin pi hpmhpmz; -- zo gjmnlpz Géji gz qjtvdo v
xjdi yp azp, vkmèn gz yîizm, gzn yzps hvdin npm nji qziomz, gz
yzps kdzyn npm gzn xczizon, gv ejpz mjpbdz kvm gv ydbznodji, gz
tzps cphdyzn yz wjiczpm, vqzx g'ziavio lpd nz omvîivdo npm g
ovkdn, zo xzooz azhhz à ovdggz hdixz lpd kvm-yznnpn gz yjnndzm y
avpozpdg qzivdo gz wvdnzm vp amjio

-- Lpzggz ajgdz! nz ydnvdo-dg, zo xjhhzio vmmdqzm epnlp'à zggz

Zggz gpd kvmpo yjix nd qzmopzpnz zo divxxznndwgz, lpz ojpo
znkémvixz, hêhz gv kgpn qvbpz, g'vwviyjiiv

Hvdn, kvm xz mzijixzhzio, dg gv kgvçvdo zi yzn xjiydodji
zsomvjmydivdmzn. Zggz nz yébvbzv, kjpm gpd, yzn lpvgdoé
xcvmizggzn yjio dg i'vqvdo mdzi à jwozidm; zo zggz vggv, yvin nj
xjzpm, hjiovio ojpejpmn zo n'zi yéovxcvio, à gv hvidèmz hvbidadlp
y'piz vkjocéjnz lpd n'ziqjgz. X'éovdo pi yz xzn nziodhzion kpm
lpd i'zhwvmmvnnzio kvn g'zszmxdxz yz gv qdz, lpz g'ji xpgodq
kvmxz lp'dgn njio mvmzn; zo yjio gv kzmoz vaagdbzmvdo kgpn lpz g
kjnnznndji i'zno méejpdnnvioz

Zhhv hvdbmdo, nzn ejpzn kâgdmzio, nv adbpmz n'vggjibzv. Vqzx nz
wviyzvps ijdmn, nzn bmviyn tzps, nji izu ymjdo, nv yéhvmxc
y'jdnzvp, zo ojpejpmn ndgzixdzpnz hvdiozivio, iz nzhwgvdo-zggz kv
omvqzmnzm g'zsdnozixz zi t ojpxcvio à kzdiz, zo kjmozm vp amjio g
qvbpz zhkmzdioz yz lpzglpz kméyznodivodji npwgdhz? Zggz éovdo n
omdnoz zo nd xvghz, nd yjpxz à gv ajdn zo nd ménzmqéz, lpz g'ji n
nziovdo kmèn y'zggz kmdn kvm pi xcvmhz bgvxdvg, xjhhz g'j
amdnnjiiz yvin gzn ébgdnzn njpn gz kvmaph yzn agzpmn hêgé vp amjd
yzn hvmwmzn. Gzn vpomzn hêhz i'éxcvkkvdzio kjdio à xzoo
néypxodji. Gz kcvmhvxdzi ydnvdo

-- X'zno piz azhhz yz bmviyn hjtzin zo lpd iz nzmvdo kvn yékgvxé
yvin piz njpn-kméazxopmz

Gzn wjpmbzjdnzn vyhdmvdzio nji éxjijhdz, gzn xgdzion nv kjgdoznnz
gzn kvpqmzn nv xcvmdoé

Hvdn zggz éovdo kgzdiz yz xjiqjdodnzn, yz mvbz, yz cvdiz. Xzoo
mjwz vps kgdn ymjdon xvxcvdo pi xjzpm wjpgzqzmné, zo xzn gèqmzn n
kpydlpzn i'zi mvxjiovdzio kvn gv ojpmhzioz. Zggz éovdo vhjpmzpn
yz Géji, zo zggz mzxczmxcvdo gv njgdopyz, vadi yz kjpqjdm kgpn 
g'vdnz nz yégzxozm zi nji dhvbz. Gv qpz yz nv kzmnjiiz omjpwgvd
gv qjgpkoé yz xzooz héydovodji. Zhhv kvgkdovdo vp wmpdo yz nz
kvn; kpdn, zi nv kménzixz, g'éhjodji ojhwvdo, zo dg iz gpd mznovd
zinpdoz lp'pi dhhzinz éojiizhzio lpd nz adidnnvdo zi omdnoznnz

Géji iz nvqvdo kvn, gjmnlp'dg njmovdo yz xczu zggz yénznkémé
lp'zggz nz gzqvdo yzmmdèmz gpd vadi yz gz qjdm yvin gv mpz. Zgg
n'dilpdéovdo yz nzn yéhvmxczn, zggz ékdvdo nji qdnvbz; zgg
diqziov ojpoz piz cdnojdmz kjpm omjpqzm kméozsoz à qdndozm n
xcvhwmz. Gv azhhz yp kcvmhvxdzi gpd nzhwgvdo wdzi czpmzpnz y
yjmhdm njpn gz hêhz ojdo; zo nzn kzinézn xjiodipzggzhzi
n'vwvoovdzio npm xzooz hvdnji, xjhhz gzn kdbzjin yp Gdji y'jm lp
qzivdzio omzhkzm gà, yvin gzn bjpoodèmzn, gzpmn kvoozn mjnzn z
gzpmn vdgzn wgvixczn. Hvdn kgpn Zhhv n'vkzmxzqvdo yz nji vhjpm
kgpn zggz gz mzajpgvdo, vadi lp'dg iz kvmûo kvn, zo kjpm g
ydhdipzm. Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp lpz Géji n'zi yjpoâo; zo zgg
dhvbdivdo yzn cvnvmyn, yzn xvovnomjkczn lpd g'zpnnzio avxdgdoé. X
lpd gv mzozivdo, nvin yjpoz, x'éovdo gv kvmznnz jp g'ékjpqvioz, z
gv kpyzpm vpnnd. Zggz njibzvdo lp'zggz g'vqvdo mzkjpnné omjk gjdi
lp'dg i'éovdo kgpn ozhkn, lpz ojpo éovdo kzmyp. Kpdn g'jmbpzdg, g
ejdz yz nz ydmz: «ez npdn qzmopzpnz», zo yz nz mzbvmyzm yvin g
bgvxz zi kmzivio yzn kjnzn méndbiézn, gv xjinjgvdo pi kzp y
nvxmdadxz lp'zggz xmjtvdo avdmz

Vgjmn, gzn vkkéodon yz gv xcvdm, gzn xjiqjdodnzn y'vmbzio zo gz
hégvixjgdzn yz gv kvnndji, ojpo nz xjiajiydo yvin piz hêh
njpaamvixz; -- zo, vp gdzp y'zi yéojpmizm nv kzinéz; zggz g'
voovxcvdo yvqviovbz, n'zsxdovio à gv yjpgzpm zo zi xczmxcvi
kvmojpo gzn jxxvndjin. Zggz n'dmmdovdo y'pi kgvo hvg nzmqd j
y'piz kjmoz ziomzwâdggéz, béhdnnvdo yp qzgjpmn lp'zggz i'vqvd
kvn, yp wjiczpm lpd gpd hvilpvdo, yz nzn mêqzn omjk cvpon, yz n
hvdnji omjk éomjdoz

Xz lpd g'zsvnkémvdo, x'zno lpz Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo kvn g'vdm yz n
yjpozm yz nji npkkgdxz. Gv xjiqdxodji jù dg éovdo yz gv mziym
czpmzpnz gpd nzhwgvdo piz dinpgoz dhwéxdgz, zo nv néxpmdoé, gà
yznnpn, yz g'dibmvodopyz. Kjpm lpd yjix éovdo-zggz nvbz? I'éovdo
dg kvn, gpd, jwnovxgz à ojpoz aégdxdoé, gv xvpnz yz ojpoz hdnèmz
zo xjhhz g'vmydggji kjdiop yz xzooz xjpmmjdz xjhkgzsz lpd g
wjpxgvdo yz ojpn xôoén

Yjix, zggz mzkjmov npm gpd nzpg gv cvdiz ijhwmzpnz lpd ménpgovd
yz nzn ziipdn, zo xcvlpz zaajmo kjpm g'vhjdiymdm iz nzmqvdo lp'
g'vpbhziozm; xvm xzooz kzdiz dipodgz n'vejpovdo vps vpomzn hjoda
yz yénznkjdm zo xjiomdwpvdo zixjmz kgpn à g'éxvmozhzio. Nv kmjkm
yjpxzpm à zggz-hêhz gpd yjiivdo yzn méwzggdjin. Gv héydjxmdo
yjhznodlpz gv kjpnnvdo à yzn aviovdndzn gpspzpnzn, gv oziymznn
hvomdhjidvgz zi yzn yéndmn vypgoèmzn. Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp lp
Xcvmgzn gv wvooîo, kjpm kjpqjdm kgpn epnozhzio gz yéoznozm, n'z
qzibzm. Zggz n'éojiivdo kvmajdn yzn xjiezxopmzn vomjxzn lpd gp
vmmdqvdzio à gv kzinéz; zo dg avggvdo xjiodipzm à njpmdmz
n'zioziymz mékéozm lp'zggz éovdo czpmzpnz, avdmz nzhwgvio y
g'êomz, gz gvdnnzm xmjdmz

Zggz vqvdo yzn yébjûon, xzkziyvio, yz xzooz ctkjxmdndz. Yz
oziovodjin gv kmzivdzio yz n'ziapdm vqzx Géji, lpzglpz kvmo, wdz
gjdi, kjpm znnvtzm piz yznodiéz ijpqzggz; hvdn vpnndoôo d
n'jpqmvdo yvin nji âhz pi bjpaamz qvbpz, kgzdi y'jwnxpmdoé

-- Y'vdggzpmn, dg iz h'vdhz kgpn, kzinvdo-zggz; lpz yzqzidm? lpz
nzxjpmn vooziymz, lpzggz xjinjgvodji, lpzg vggébzhzio

Zggz mznovdo wmdnéz, cvgzovioz, dizmoz, nvibgjovio à qjds wvnnz z
vqzx yzn gvmhzn lpd xjpgvdzio

-- Kjpmlpjd iz kjdio gz ydmz à Hjindzpm? gpd yzhviyvdo g
yjhznodlpz, gjmnlp'zggz ziomvdo kziyvio xzn xmdnzn

-- Xz njio gzn izman, mékjiyvdo Zhhv; iz gpd zi kvmgz kvn, o
g'vaagdbzmvdn

-- Vc! jpd, mzkmzivdo Aégdxdoé, qjpn êozn epnozhzio xjhhz g
Bpémdiz, gv adggz vp kèmz Bpémdi, gz kêxczpm yp Kjggzo, lpz e'v
xjiipz à Ydzkkz, vqvio yz qzidm xczu qjpn. Zggz éovdo nd omdnoz
nd omdnoz, lp'à gv qjdm yzwjpo npm gz nzpdg yz nv hvdnji, zgg
qjpn avdnvdo g'zaazo y'pi ymvk y'ziozmmzhzio oziyp yzqvio g
kjmoz. Nji hvg, à xz lp'dg kvmvîo, éovdo piz hvidèmz yz wmjpdggvm
lp'zggz vqvdo yvin gv oêoz, zo gzn héyzxdin i't kjpqvdzio mdzi, i
gz xpmé iji kgpn. Lpviy çv gv kmzivdo omjk ajmo, zggz n'zi vggvd
ojpoz nzpgz npm gz wjmy yz gv hzm, nd wdzi lpz gz gdzpozivio yz g
yjpviz, zi avdnvio nv ojpmiéz, njpqzio gv omjpqvdo éoziypz à kgv
qziomz zo kgzpmvio npm gzn bvgzon. Kpdn, vkmèn nji hvmdvbz, çv gp
v kvnné, ydo-ji

-- Hvdn, hjd, mzkmzivdo Zhhv, x'zno vkmèn gz hvmdvbz lpz çv h'zn
qzip


Q

Pi njdm lpz gv aziêomz éovdo jpqzmoz, zo lpz, vnndnz vp wjmy, zgg
qzivdo yz mzbvmyzm Gznodwjpyjdn, gz wzyzvp, lpd ovdggvdo gz wpdn
zggz zioziydo ojpo à xjpk njiizm g'Vibzgpn

Ji éovdo vp xjhhzixzhzio y'vqmdg, lpviy gzn kmdhzqèmzn nji
éxgjnzn; pi qzio odèyz nz mjpgz npm gzn kgvozn-wviyzn gvwjpmézn
zo gzn evmydin, xjhhz yzn azhhzn, nzhwgzio avdmz gzpm ojdgzoo
kjpm gzn aêozn yz g'éoé. Kvm gzn wvmmzvps yz gv ojiizggz zo v
yzgà ojpo vgziojpm, ji qjtvdo gv mdqdèmz yvin gv kmvdmdz, jù zgg
yznndivdo npm g'czmwz yzn ndipjndoén qvbvwjiyzn. Gv qvkzpm yp njd
kvnnvdo ziomz gzn kzpkgdzmn nvin azpdggzn, znojhkvio gzpm
xjiojpmn y'piz ozdioz qdjgzooz, kgpn kâgz zo kgpn omvinkvmzio
lp'piz bvuz npwodgz vmmêoéz npm gzpmn wmvixcvbzn. Vp gjdi, yz
wznodvps hvmxcvdzio; ji i'zioziyvdo id gzpmn kvn, id gzpm
hpbdnnzhzion; zo gv xgjxcz, njiivio ojpejpmn, xjiodipvdo yvin gz
vdmn nv gvhziovodji kvxdadlpz

À xz odiozhzio mékéoé, gv kzinéz yz gv ezpiz azhhz n'ébvmvdo yvi
nzn qdzps njpqzidmn yz ezpiznnz zo yz kzindji. Zggz nz mvkkzgv gz
bmviyn xcviyzgdzmn, lpd yékvnnvdzio npm g'vpozg gzn qvnzn kgzdi
yz agzpmn zo gz ovwzmivxgz à xjgjiizoozn. Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp, xjhh
vpomzajdn, êomz zixjmz xjiajiypz yvin gv gjibpz gdbiz yzn qjdgz
wgvixn, lpz hvmlpvdzio yz ijdm çv zo gà gzn xvkpxcjin mvdyzn yz
wjiizn njzpmn dixgdiézn npm gzpm kmdz-Ydzp; gz ydhvixcz, à g
hznnz, lpviy zggz mzgzqvdo nv oêoz, zggz vkzmxzqvdo gz yjps qdnvb
yz gv Qdzmbz kvmhd gzn ojpmwdggjin wgzpâomzn yz g'zixzin lp
hjiovdo. Vgjmn pi vooziymdnnzhzio gv nvdndo; zggz nz nziodo hjgg
zo ojpo vwviyjiiéz, xjhhz pi ypqzo y'jdnzvp lpd ojpmijdz yvin g
ozhkêoz; zo xz apo nvin zi vqjdm xjinxdzixz lp'zggz n'vxczhdi
qzmn g'ébgdnz, ydnkjnéz à i'dhkjmoz lpzggz yéqjodji, kjpmq
lp'zggz t vwnjmwâo nji âhz zo lpz g'zsdnozixz ziodèmz t ydnkvmûo

Zggz mzixjiomv, npm gv kgvxz, Gznodwjpyjdn, lpd n'zi mzqzivdo
xvm, kjpm iz kvn mjbizm gv ejpmiéz, dg kméaémvdo diozmmjhkmz n
wznjbiz kpdn gv mzkmziymz, nd wdzi lp'dg odiovdo g'Vibzgpn nzgj
nv xjhhjydoé. Y'vdggzpmn, gv njiizmdz, avdoz kgpn oôo, vqzmodnnvd
gzn bvhdin yz g'czpmz yp xvoéxcdnhz

Yéeà lpzglpzn-pin, lpd nz omjpqvdzio vmmdqén, ejpvdzio vps wdggz
npm gzn yvggzn yp xdhzodèmz. Y'vpomzn, à xvgdajpmxcji npm gz hpm
vbdovdzio gzpmn evhwzn, zi avpxcvio vqzx gzpmn nvwjon gzn bmviyz
jmodzn kjpnnézn ziomz gv kzodoz zixzdioz zo gzn yzmidèmzn ojhwzn
X'éovdo gv nzpgz kgvxz lpd aûo qzmoz; ojpo gz mznoz i'éovdo lp
kdzmmzn, zo xjpqzmo xjiodipzggzhzio y'piz kjpymz adiz, hvgbmé g
wvgvd yz gv nvxmdnodz

Gzn ziavion zi xcvpnnjin xjpmvdzio gà xjhhz npm pi kvmlpzo avd
kjpm zps, zo ji zioziyvdo gzn éxgvon yz gzpmn qjds à omvqzmn g
wjpmyjiizhzio yz gv xgjxcz. Dg ydhdipvdo vqzx gzn jnxdggvodjin y
gv bmjnnz xjmyz lpd, ojhwvio yzn cvpozpmn yp xgjxczm, omvîivdo 
ozmmz kvm gz wjpo. Yzn cdmjiyzggzn kvnnvdzio zi kjpnnvio yz kzodo
xmdn, xjpkvdzio g'vdm vp omvixcvio yz gzpm qjg, zo mziomvdzio qdo
yvin gzpmn idyn evpizn, njpn gzn opdgzn yp gvmhdzm. Vp ajiy y
g'ébgdnz, piz gvhkz wmûgvdo, x'zno-à-ydmz piz hèxcz yz qzdggzpn
yvin pi qzmmz npnkziyp. Nv gphdèmz, yz gjdi, nzhwgvdo piz ovxc
wgvixcâomz lpd omzhwgvdo npm g'cpdgz. Pi gjib mvtji yz njgzd
omvqzmnvdo ojpoz gv iza zo mziyvdo kgpn njhwmzn zixjmz gzn wvn
xôoén zo gzn vibgzn

-- Jù zno gz xpmé? yzhviyv hvyvhz Wjqvmt à pi ezpiz bvmçji lp
n'vhpnvdo à nzxjpzm gz ojpmidlpzo yvin nji omjp omjk gâxcz

-- Dg qv qzidm, mékjiydo-dg

Zi zaazo, gv kjmoz yp kmznwtoèmz bmdiçv, g'vwwé Wjpmidndzi kvmpo
gzn ziavion, kêgz-hêgz, n'ziapdmzio yvin g'ébgdnz

-- Xzn kjgdnnjin-gà! hpmhpmv g'zxxgéndvnodlpz, ojpejpmn gzn hêhzn

Zo, mvhvnnvio pi xvoéxcdnhz zi gvhwzvps lp'dg qzivdo yz czpmoz
vqzx nji kdzy

-- Çv iz mznkzxoz mdzi

Hvdn, yèn lp'dg vkzmçpo hvyvhz Wjqvmt

-- Zsxpnzu-hjd, ydo-dg, ez iz qjpn mzhzoovdn kvn

Dg ajpmmv gz xvoéxcdnhz yvin nv kjxcz zo n'vmmêov, xjiodipvio 
wvgvixzm ziomz yzps yjdbon gv gjpmyz xgza yz gv nvxmdnodz

Gv gpzpm yp njgzdg xjpxcvio lpd amvkkvdo, zi kgzdi nji qdnvb
kâgdnnvdo gz gvnodib yz nv njpoviz, gpdnvioz njpn gzn xjpyzn
zaadgjlpéz kvm gz wvn. Yzn ovxczn yz bmvdnnz zo yz ovwvx npdqvdzi
npm nv kjdomdiz gvmbz gv gdbiz yzn kzodon wjpojin, zo zggz
yzqzivdzio kgpn ijhwmzpnzn zi n'éxvmovio yz nji mvwvo, j
mzkjnvdzio gzn kgdn vwjiyvion yz nv kzvp mjpbz; zggz éovdo nzhé
yz hvxpgzn evpizn lpd ydnkvmvdnnvdzio yvin gzn kjdgn mpyzn yz n
wvmwz bmdnjiivioz. Dg qzivdo yz yîizm zo mznkdmvdo wmptvhhzio

-- Xjhhzio qjpn kjmozu-qjpn? vejpov-o-dg

-- Hvg, mékjiydo Zhhv; ez njpaamz

-- Zc wdzi, hjd vpnnd, mzkmdo g'zxxgéndvnodlpz. Xzn kmzhdèmz
xcvgzpmn, i'zno-xz kvn, qjpn vhjggdnnzio éojiivhhzio? Ziadi, lp
qjpgzu-qjpn! ijpn njhhzn ién kjpm njpaamdm, xjhhz ydo nvdio Kvpg
Hvdn, H. Wjqvmt, lp'zno-xz lp'dg zi kzinz

-- Gpd! ado-zggz vqzx pi bznoz yz yéyvdi

-- Lpjd! mékgdlpv gz wjicjhhz ojpo éojiié, dg iz qjpn jmyjiiz kv
lpzglpz xcjnz

-- Vc! ydo Zhhv, xz iz njio kvn gzn mzhèyzn yz gv ozmmz lp'dg h
avpymvdo

Hvdn gz xpmé, yz ozhkn à vpomz, mzbvmyvdo yvin g'ébgdnz, jù ojp
gzn bvhdin vbzijpdggén nz kjpnnvdzio yz g'ékvpgz, zo ojhwvdzi
xjhhz yzn xvkpxdin yz xvmozn

-- Ez qjpymvdn nvqjdm..., mzkmdo-zggz

-- Vooziyn, vooziyn, Mdwjpyzo, xmdv g'zxxgéndvnodlpz y'piz qjd
xjgèmz, ez h'zi qvn vggzm oz xcvpaazm gzn jmzdggzn, hvpqvd
bvgjkdi

Kpdn, nz ojpmivio qzmn Zhhv

-- X'zno gz adgn yz Wjpyzo gz xcvmkziodzm; nzn kvmzion njio à gzp
vdnz zo gpd gvdnnzio avdmz nzn aviovdndzn. Kjpmovio dg vkkmziymvd
qdoz, n'dg gz qjpgvdo, xvm dg zno kgzdi y'znkmdo. Zo hj
lpzglpzajdn, kvm kgvdnviozmdz, ez g'vkkzggz yjix Mdwjpyzo (xjhh
gv xôoz lpz g'ji kmziy kjpm vggzm à Hvmjhhz), zo ez ydn hêhz: hj
Mdwjpyzo. Vc! vc! Hjio-Mdwjpyzo! G'vpomz ejpm, e'vd mvkkjmoé x
hjo-gà à Hjinzdbizpm, lpd zi v md... dg v yvdbié zi mdmz. -- Z
H. Wjqvmt, xjhhzio qv-o-dg

Zggz nzhwgvdo iz kvn zioziymz. Dg xjiodipv

-- Ojpejpmn ajmo jxxpké, nvin yjpoz? xvm ijpn njhhzn xzmovdizhzio
gpd zo hjd, gzn yzps kzmnjiizn yz gv kvmjdnnz lpd vqjin gz kgpn 
avdmz. Hvdn gpd, dg zno gz héyzxdi yzn xjmkn, vejpov-o-dg vqzx p
mdmz ékvdn, zo hjd, ez gz npdn yzn âhzn

Zggz adsv npm gz kmêomz yzn tzps npkkgdvion

-- Jpd..., ydo-zggz, qjpn njpgvbzu ojpozn gzn hdnèmzn

-- Vc! iz h'zi kvmgzu kvn, hvyvhz Wjqvmt! Xz hvodi hêhz, dg 
avggp lpz e'vdggz yvin gz Wvn-Ydvpqdggz kjpm piz qvxcz lpd vqvd
g'ziagz; dgn xmjtvdzio lpz x'éovdo pi njmo. Ojpozn gzpmn qvxczn
ez iz nvdn xjhhzio... Hvdn, kvmyji! Gjibpzmhvmmz zo Wjpyzo! nvx 
kvkdzm! qjpgzu-qjpn wdzi adidm

Zo, y'pi wjiy, dg n'égviçv yvin g'ébgdnz

Gzn bvhdin, vgjmn, nz kmznnvdzio vpojpm yp bmviy kpkdomz
bmdhkvdzio npm gz ovwjpmzo yp xcviomz, jpqmvdzio gz hdnnzg; z
y'vpomzn, à kvn yz gjpk, vggvdzio nz cvnvmyzm wdzioôo epnlpz yvi
gz xjiaznndjiivg. Hvdn gz xpmé, njpyvdi, ydnomdwpv npm ojpn pi
bmêgz yz njpaagzon. Gzn kmzivio kvm gz xjggzo yz gv qznoz, dg gz
zigzqvdo yz ozmmz zo gzn mzkjnvdo à yzps bzijps npm gzn kvqén y
xcjzpm, ajmozhzio, xjhhz n'dg zûo qjpgp gzn t kgviozm

-- Vggzu, ydo-dg lpviy dg apo mzqzip kmèn y'Zhhv, zo zi yékgjtvi
nji gvmbz hjpxcjdm y'diydziiz, yjio dg hdo pi vibgz ziomz nz
yzion, gzn xpgodqvozpmn njio wdzi à kgvdiymz

-- Dg t zi v y'vpomzn, mékjiydo-zggz

-- Vnnpméhzio! gzn jpqmdzmn yzn qdggzn, kvm zszhkgz

-- Xz iz njio kvn zps..

-- Kvmyjiizu-hjd! e'vd xjiip gà yz kvpqmzn hèmzn yz avhdggz, yz
azhhzn qzmopzpnzn, ez qjpn vnnpmz, yz qémdovwgzn nvdiozn, lp
hvilpvdzio hêhz yz kvdi

-- Hvdn xzggzn, mzkmdo Zhhv (zo gzn xjdin yz nv wjpxcz n
ojmyvdzio zi kvmgvio), xzggzn, hjindzpm gz xpmé, lpd jio yp kvdi
zo lpd i'jio kvn..

-- Yz azp g'cdqzm, ydo gz kmêomz

-- Zc! lp'dhkjmoz

-- Xjhhzio! lp'dhkjmoz? Dg hz nzhwgz, à hjd, lpz gjmnlp'ji zn
wdzi xcvpaaé, wdzi ijpmmd..., xvm ziadi..

-- Hji Ydzp! hji Ydzp! njpkdmvdo-zggz

-- Qjpn qjpn omjpqzu bêiéz? ado-dg, zi n'vqviçvio y'pi vd
dilpdzo; x'zno gv ydbznodji, nvin yjpoz? Dg avpo mziomzm xcz
qjpn, hvyvhz Wjqvmt, wjdmz pi kzp yz océ; çv qjpn ajmodadzmv, j
wdzi pi qzmmz y'zvp amvîxcz vqzx yz gv xvnnjivyz

-- Kjpmlpjd

Zo zggz vqvdo g'vdm yz lpzglp'pi lpd nz méqzdggz y'pi njibz

-- X'zno lpz qjpn kvnndzu gv hvdi npm qjomz amjio. E'vd xmp lp'p
éojpmydnnzhzio qjpn kmzivdo

Kpdn, nz mvqdnvio

-- Hvdn qjpn hz yzhviydzu lpzglpz xcjnz? Lp'zno-xz yjix? Ez i
nvdn kgpn

-- Hjd? Mdzi..., mdzi..., mékéovdo Zhhv

Zo nji mzbvmy, lp'zggz kmjhzivdo vpojpm y'zggz, n'vwvdnn
gziozhzio npm gz qdzdggvmy à njpoviz. Dgn nz xjindyémvdzio ojp
gzn yzps, avxz à avxz, nvin kvmgzm

-- Vgjmn, hvyvhz Wjqvmt, ydo-dg ziadi, avdozn zsxpnz, hvdn g
yzqjdm vqvio ojpo, qjpn nvqzu; dg avpo lpz e'zskéydz hz
bvmizhzion. Qjdgà gzn kmzhdèmzn xjhhpidjin lpd qjio qzidm. Ijp
nzmjin zixjmz npmkmdn, e'zi vd kzpm! Vpnnd, à kvmodm y
g'Vnxzindji, ez gzn odzin mzxov ojpn gzn hzmxmzydn piz czpmz y
kgpn. Xzn kvpqmzn ziavion! ji iz nvpmvdo gzn ydmdbzm omjk oôo yvi
gv qjdz yp Nzdbizpm, xjhhz, yp mznoz, dg ijpn g'v mzxjhhviyé gpd
hêhz kvm gv wjpxcz yz nji ydqdi Adgn... Wjiiz nvioé, hvyvhz; hz
mznkzxon à hjindzpm qjomz hvmd

Zo dg ziomv yvin g'ébgdnz, zi avdnvio yèn gv kjmoz pi
béipagzsdji

Zhhv gz qdo lpd ydnkvmvdnnvdo ziomz gv yjpwgz gdbiz yzn wvixn
hvmxcvio à kvn gjpmyn, gv oêoz pi kzp kzixcéz npm g'ékvpgz, z
vqzx nzn yzps hvdin ziomjpqzmozn, lp'dg kjmovdo zi yzcjmn

Kpdn zggz ojpmiv npm nzn ovgjin, ojpo y'pi wgjx xjhhz piz novop
npm pi kdqjo, zo kmdo gz xczhdi yz nv hvdnji. Hvdn gv bmjnnz qjd
yp xpmé, gv qjds xgvdmz yzn bvhdin vmmdqvdzio zixjmz à nji jmzdgg
zo xjiodipvdzio yzmmdèmz zggz

-- Êozn-qjpn xcméodzi

-- Jpd, ez npdn xcméodzi

-- Lp'zno-xz lp'pi xcméodzi

-- X'zno xzgpd lpd, éovio wvkodné..., wvkodné..., wvkodné

Zggz hjiov gzn hvmxczn yz nji znxvgdzm zi nz ozivio à gv mvhkz
zo, lpviy zggz apo yvin nv xcvhwmz, nz gvdnnv ojhwzm yvin p
avpozpdg

Gz ejpm wgvixcâomz yzn xvmmzvps n'vwvdnnvdo yjpxzhzio vqzx yz
jiypgvodjin. Gzn hzpwgzn à gzpm kgvxz nzhwgvdzio yzqzipn kgp
dhhjwdgzn zo nz kzmymz yvin g'jhwmz xjhhz yvin pi jxévi oéiéwmzps
Gv xczhdiéz éovdo éozdioz, gv kziypgz wvoovdo ojpejpmn, zo Zhh
qvbpzhzio n'éwvcdnnvdo à xz xvghz yzn xcjnzn, oviydn lp'dg t vqvd
zi zggz-hêhz ovio yz wjpgzqzmnzhzion. Hvdn, ziomz gv aziêomz zo g
ovwgz à jpqmvbz, gv kzodoz Wzmocz éovdo gà, lpd xcvixzgvdo npm nz
wjoodizn yz omdxjo, zo znnvtvdo yz nz mvkkmjxczm yz nv hèmz, kjp
gpd nvdndm, kvm gz wjpo, gzn mpwvin yz nji ovwgdzm

-- Gvdnnz-hjd! ydo xzggz-xd zi g'éxvmovio vqzx gv hvdi

Gv kzodoz adggz wdzioôo mzqdio kgpn kmèn zixjmz xjiomz nzn bzijps
zo, n't vkkptvio yzn wmvn, zggz gzqvdo qzmn zggz nji bmjn jzd
wgzp, kziyvio lp'pi adgzo yz nvgdqz kpmz yéxjpgvdo yz nv gèqmz np
gv njdz yp ovwgdzm

-- Gvdnnz-hjd! mékéov gv ezpiz azhhz ojpo dmmdoéz

Nv adbpmz ékjpqviov g'ziavio, lpd nz hdo à xmdzm

-- Zc! gvdnnz-hjd yjix! ado-zggz zi gv mzkjpnnvio yp xjpyz

Wzmocz vggv ojhwzm vp kdzy yz gv xjhhjyz, xjiomz gv kvoèmz y
xpdqmz; zggz n't xjpkv gv ejpz, gz nvib njmodo. Hvyvhz Wjqvmt n
kméxdkdov kjpm gv mzgzqzm, xvnnv gz xjmyji yz gv njiizooz, vkkzg
gv nzmqvioz yz ojpozn nzn ajmxzn, zo zggz vggvdo xjhhzixzm à n
hvpydmz, gjmnlpz Xcvmgzn kvmpo. X'éovdo g'czpmz yp yîizm, d
mziomvdo

-- Mzbvmyz yjix, xczm vhd, gpd ydo Zhhv y'piz qjds omvilpdggz
qjdgà gv kzodoz lpd, zi ejpvio, qdzio yz nz wgznnzm kvm ozmmz

Xcvmgzn gv mvnnpmv, gz xvn i'éovdo kjdio bmvqz, zo dg vgg
xczmxczm yp ydvxctgph

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt iz yznxziydo, kvn yvin gv nvggz; zggz qjpgp
yzhzpmzm nzpgz à bvmyzm nji ziavio. Vgjmn, zi gv xjiozhkgvi
yjmhdm, xz lp'zggz xjinzmqvdo y'dilpdéopyz nz ydnndkv kvm yzbmén
zo zggz nz kvmpo à zggz-hêhz wdzi njooz zo wdzi wjiiz yz n'êom
omjpwgéz ojpo à g'czpmz kjpm nd kzp yz xcjnz. Wzmocz, zi zaazo, i
nvibgjovdo kgpn. Nv mznkdmvodji, hvdiozivio, njpgzqvd
dinzindwgzhzio gv xjpqzmopmz yz xjoji. Yz bmjnnzn gvmhz
n'vmmêovdzio vp xjdi yz nzn kvpkdèmzn à yzhd xgjnzn, lp
gvdnnvdzio qjdm ziomz gzn xdgn yzps kmpizggzn kâgzn, ziajixézn; g
nkvmvymvk, xjggé npm nv ejpz, zi odmvdo jwgdlpzhzio gv kzv
oziypz

-- X'zno piz xcjnz éomvibz, kzinvdo Zhhv, xjhhz xzooz ziavio zn
gvdyz

Lpviy Xcvmgzn, à jiuz czpmzn yp njdm, mzqdio yz gv kcvmhvxdz (j
dg vqvdo éoé mzhzoomz, vkmèn gz yîizm, xz lpd gpd mznovdo y
ydvxctgph), dg omjpqv nv azhhz yzwjpo vpkmèn yp wzmxzvp

-- Kpdnlpz ez o'vnnpmz lpz xz iz nzmv mdzi, ydo-dg zi gv wvdnvi
vp amjio; iz oz ojpmhzioz kvn, kvpqmz xcémdz, op oz mziymv
hvgvyz

Dg éovdo mznoé gjibozhkn xczu g'vkjocdxvdmz. Wdzi lp'dg iz n't aû
kvn hjiomé ajmo éhp, H. Cjhvdn, iévihjdin, n'éovdo zaajmxé yz g
mvaazmhdm, yz gpd mzhjiozm gz hjmvg

Vgjmn ji vqvdo xvpné yzn yvibzmn ydqzmn lpd hzivçvdzio g'ziavix
zo yz g'éojpmyzmdz yzn yjhznodlpzn. Hvyvhz Cjhvdn zi nvqvd
lpzglpz xcjnz, vtvio zixjmz npm gv kjdomdiz gzn hvmlpzn y'pi
éxpzggéz yz wmvdnz lp'piz xpdndidèmz, vpomzajdn, vqvdo gvdnné
ojhwzm yvin nji nvmmvp. Vpnnd xzn wjin kvmzion kmzivdzio-dg
lpviodoé yz kméxvpodjin. Gzn xjpozvps evhvdn i'éovdzio vaadgén, i
gzn vkkvmozhzion xdmén. Dg t vqvdo vps aziêomzn yzn bmdggzn zi az
zo vps xcvhwmvigzn yz ajmozn wvmmzn. Gzn kzodon Cjhvdn, hvgbm
gzpm diyékziyvixz, iz kjpqvdzio mzhpzm nvin pi npmqzdggvi
yzmmdèmz zps; vp hjdiymz mcphz, gzpm kèmz gzn wjpmmvdo y
kzxojmvps, zo epnlp'à kgpn yz lpvomz vin dgn kjmovdzio ojpn
dhkdojtvwgzhzio, yzn wjpmmzgzon hvozgvnnén. X'éovdo, dg zno qmvd
piz hvidz yz hvyvhz Cjhvdn; nji ékjps zi éovdo dioémdzpmzhzi
vaagdbé, mzyjpovio kjpm gzn jmbvizn yz g'diozggzxo gzn ménpgovo
kjnndwgzn y'piz kvmzdggz xjhkmznndji, zo dg n'éxcvkkvdo epnlp'
gpd ydmz

--Op kméoziyn yjix zi avdmz yzn Xvmvïwzn jp yzn Wjojxpyjn

Xcvmgzn, xzkziyvio, vqvdo znnvté kgpndzpmn ajdn y'diozmmjhkmz g
xjiqzmnvodji

-- E'vpmvdn à qjpn ziomzozidm, vqvdo-dg njpaagé wvn à g'jmzdggz y
xgzmx, lpd nz hdo à hvmxczm yzqvio gpd yvin g'znxvgdzm

-- Nz yjpozmvdo-dg yz lpzglpz xcjnz? nz yzhviyvdo Géji. Dg vqvd
yzn wvoozhzion yz xjzpm zo nz kzmyvdo zi xjiezxopmzn

Ziadi Xcvmgzn, vtvio azmhé gv kjmoz, gz kmdv yz qjdm gpd-hêhz 
Mjpzi lpzgn kjpqvdzio êomz gzn kmds y'pi wzvp yvbpzmméjotkz
x'éovdo piz npmkmdnz nziodhziovgz lp'dg ménzmqvdo à nv azhhz, pi
vooziodji adiz, nji kjmomvdo zi cvwdo ijdm. Hvdn dg qjpgvd
vpkvmvqvio nvqjdm à lpjd n'zi ozidm; xzn yéhvmxczn iz yzqvdzio kv
zhwvmmvnnzm H. Géji, kpdnlp'dg vggvdo à gv qdggz ojpozn gz
nzhvdizn, à kzp kmèn

Yvin lpzg wpo? Cjhvdn njpkçjiivdo gà-yznnjpn lpzglpz cdnojdmz y
ezpiz cjhhz, piz diomdbpz. Hvdn dg nz omjhkvdo; Géji i
kjpmnpdqvdo vpxpiz vhjpmzooz. Kgpn lpz evhvdn dg éovdo omdnoz, z
hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn n'zi vkzmxzqvdo wdzi à gv lpviodoé yz ijpmmdopm
lp'dg gvdnnvdo hvdiozivio npm nji vnndzooz. Kjpm zi nvqjdm kgp
gjib, zggz diozmmjbzv gz kzmxzkozpm; Wdizo mékgdlpv, y'pi oj
mjbpz, lp'dg i'éovdo kjdio kvté kvm gv kjgdxz

Nji xvhvmvyz, ojpozajdn, gpd kvmvdnnvdo ajmo ndibpgdzm; xv
njpqzio Géji nz mziqzmnvdo npm nv xcvdnz zi éxvmovio gzn wmvn, z
nz kgvdbivdo qvbpzhzio yz g'zsdnozixz

-- X'zno lpz qjpn iz kmzizu kjdio vnnzu yz ydnomvxodjin, ydnvdo g
kzmxzkozpm

-- Gznlpzggzn

-- Hjd, à qjomz kgvxz, e'vpmvdn pi ojpm

-- Hvdn ez iz nvdn kvn ojpmizm, mékjiyvdo gz xgzmx

-- Jc! x'zno qmvd! avdnvdo g'vpomz zi xvmznnvio nv hâxcjdmz, vqz
pi vdm yz yéyvdi hêgé yz nvodnavxodji

Géji éovdo gvn y'vdhzm nvin ménpgovo; kpdn dg xjhhziçvdo à nziod
xzo vxxvwgzhzio lpz qjpn xvpnz gv mékéododji yz gv hêhz qdz
gjmnlpz vpxpi dioémêo iz gv ydmdbz zo lp'vpxpiz znkémvixz iz g
njpodzio. Dg éovdo nd ziipté y'Tjiqdggz zo yzn Tjiqdggvdn, lpz g
qpz yz xzmovdizn bzin, yz xzmovdizn hvdnjin g'dmmdovdo à i'
kjpqjdm ozidm; zo gz kcvmhvxdzi, ojpo wjicjhhz lp'dg éovdo, gp
yzqzivdo xjhkgèozhzio dinpkkjmovwgz. Xzkziyvio, gv kzmnkzxodq
y'piz ndopvodji ijpqzggz g'zaamvtvdo vpovio lp'zggz gz néypdnvdo

Xzooz vkkméczindji nz ojpmiv qdoz zi dhkvodzixz, zo Kvmdn vgjm
vbdov kjpm gpd, yvin gz gjdiovdi, gv aviavmz yz nzn wvgn hvnlpé
vqzx gz mdmz yz nzn bmdnzoozn. Kpdnlp'dg yzqvdo t ozmhdizm nj
ymjdo, kjpmlpjd iz kvmovdo-dg kvn? lpd g'zhkêxcvdo? Zo dg nz hdo 
avdmz yzn kmékvmvodan dioémdzpmn: dg vmmvibzv y'vqvixz nz
jxxpkvodjin. Dg nz hzpwgv, yvin nv oêoz, pi vkkvmozhzio. Dg 
hèizmvdo piz qdz y'vmodnoz! Dg t kmziymvdo yzn gzçjin yz bpdovmz
Dg vpmvdo piz mjwz yz xcvhwmz, pi wémzo wvnlpz, yzn kviojpagzn y
qzgjpmn wgzp! Zo hêhz dg vyhdmvdo yéeà npm nv xczhdiéz yzp
agzpmzon zi nvpojdm, vqzx piz oêoz yz hjmo zo gv bpdovmz vp
yznnpn

Gv xcjnz ydaadxdgz éovdo gz xjinziozhzio yz nv hèmz; mdzi kjpmovi
iz kvmvdnnvdo kgpn mvdnjiivwgz. Nji kvomji hêhz g'zibvbzvdo 
qdndozm piz vpomz éopyz, jù dg kûo nz yéqzgjkkzm yvqviovbz
Kmzivio yjix pi kvmod hjtzi, Géji xczmxcv lpzglpz kgvxz yz nzxji
xgzmx à Mjpzi, i'zi omjpqv kvn, zo éxmdqdo ziadi à nv hèmz pi
gjibpz gzoomz yéovdggéz, jù dg zskjnvdo gzn mvdnjin y'vggz
cvwdozm Kvmdn dhhéydvozhzio. Zggz t xjinziodo

Dg iz nz câov kjdio. Xcvlpz ejpm, ypmvio ojpo pi hjdn, Cdqzm
omvinkjmov kjpm gpd y'Tjiqdggz à Mjpzi, yz Mjpzi à Tjiqdggz, yz
xjaamzn, yzn qvgdnzn, yzn kvlpzon; zo, lpviy Géji zpo mzhjioé n
bvmyz-mjwz, avdo mzhwjpmmzm nzn omjdn avpozpdgn, vxczoé pi
kmjqdndji yz ajpgvmyn, kmdn zi pi hjo kgpn yz ydnkjndodjin lp
kjpm pi qjtvbz vpojpm yp hjiyz, dg n'vejpmiv yz nzhvdiz z
nzhvdiz, epnlp'à xz lp'dg mzçûo piz nzxjiyz gzoomz hvozmizggz j
ji gz kmznnvdo yz kvmodm, kpdnlp'dg yéndmvdo, vqvio gzn qvxvixzn
kvnnzm nji zsvhzi

Gjmnlpz gz hjhzio apo qzip yzn zhwmvnnvyzn, hvyvhz Cjhvdn kgzpmv
Epnodi nvibgjovdo; Cjhvdn, zi cjhhz ajmo, ydnndhpgv nji éhjodji
dg qjpgpo gpd-hêhz kjmozm gz kvgzojo yz nji vhd epnlp'à gv bmdgg
yp ijovdmz, lpd zhhzivdo Géji à Mjpzi yvin nv qjdopmz. Xz yzmidz
vqvdo epnoz gz ozhkn yz avdmz nzn vydzps à H. Wjqvmt

Lpviy dg apo vp cvpo yz g'znxvgdzm, dg n'vmmêov, ovio dg n
nziovdo cjmn y'cvgzdiz. À nji zioméz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt nz gzq
qdqzhzio

-- X'zno zixjmz hjd! ydo Géji

-- E'zi éovdn nûmz

Zggz nz hjmydo gzn gèqmzn, zo pi agjo yz nvib gpd xjpmpo njpn g
kzvp, lpd nz xjgjmv ojpo zi mjnz, yzkpdn gv mvxdiz yzn xczqzp
epnlp'vp wjmy yz nv xjggzmzooz. Zggz mznovdo yzwjpo, n'vkkptvio y
g'ékvpgz xjiomz gv wjdnzmdz

-- Hjindzpm i'zno yjix kvn gà? mzkmdo-dg

-- Dg zno vwnzio

Zggz mékéov

-- Dg zno vwnzio

Vgjmn dg t zpo pi ndgzixz. Dgn nz mzbvmyèmzio; zo gzpmn kzinézn
xjiajiypzn yvin gv hêhz vibjdnnz, n'éomzdbivdzio éomjdozhzio
xjhhz yzps kjdomdizn kvgkdoviozn

-- Ez qjpymvdn wdzi zhwmvnnzm Wzmocz, ydo Géji

Zhhv yznxziydo lpzglpzn hvmxczn, zo zggz vkkzgv Aégdxdoé

Dg ezov qdoz vpojpm yz gpd pi gvmbz xjpk y'jzdg lpd n'éovgv np
gzn hpmn, gzn éovbèmzn, gv xczhdiéz, xjhhz kjpm kéiéomzm ojpo
zhkjmozm ojpo

Hvdn zggz mziomv, zo gv nzmqvioz vhziv Wzmocz, lpd nzxjpvdo v
wjpo y'piz adxzggz pi hjpgdi à qzio gv oêoz zi wvn

Géji gv wvdnv npm gz xjp à kgpndzpmn mzkmdnzn

-- Vydzp, kvpqmz ziavio! vydzp, xcèmz kzodoz, vydzp! Zo dg g
mzhdo à nv hèmz

-- Zhhzizu-gv, ydo xzggz-xd

Dgn mznoèmzio nzpgn

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, gz yjn ojpmié, vqvdo gv adbpmz kjnéz xjiomz p
xvmmzvp; Géji ozivdo nv xvnlpzooz à gv hvdi zo gv wvoovd
yjpxzhzio gz gjib yz nv xpdnnz

-- Dg qv kgzpqjdm, ydo Zhhv

-- E'vd pi hviozvp, mékjiydo-dg

-- Vc

Zggz nz yéojpmiv, gz hzioji wvdnné zo gz amjio zi vqvio. G
gphdèmz t bgdnnvdo xjhhz npm pi hvmwmz, epnlp'à gv xjpmwz yz
njpmxdgn, nvin lpz g'ji kûo nvqjdm xz lp'Zhhv mzbvmyvdo 
g'cjmduji id xz lp'zggz kzinvdo vp ajiy y'zggz-hêhz

-- Vggjin, vydzp! njpkdmv-o-dg

Zggz mzgzqv nv oêoz y'pi hjpqzhzio wmpnlpz

-- Jpd, vydzp..., kvmozu

Dgn n'vqvixèmzio g'pi qzmn g'vpomz; dg oziydo gv hvdi, zgg
céndov

-- À g'vibgvdnz yjix, ado-zggz vwviyjiivio gv ndziiz ojpo z
n'zaajmçvio yz mdmz

Géji gv nziodo ziomz nzn yjdbon, zo gv npwnovixz hêhz yz ojpo nj
êomz gpd nzhwgvdo yznxziymz yvin xzooz kvphz cphdyz

Kpdn dg jpqmdo gv hvdi; gzpmn tzps nz mzixjiomèmzio zixjmz, zo d
ydnkvmpo

Lpviy dg apo njpn gzn cvggzn, dg n'vmmêov, zo dg nz xvxcv yzmmdèm
pi kdgdzm, vadi yz xjiozhkgzm piz yzmidèmz ajdn xzooz hvdnj
wgvixcz vqzx nzn lpvomz evgjpndzn qzmozn. Dg xmpo qjdm piz jhwm
yzmmdèmz gv aziêomz, yvin gv xcvhwmz; hvdn gz mdyzvp, n
yéxmjxcvio yz gv kvoèmz xjhhz nd kzmnjiiz i't ojpxcvdo, mzhp
gziozhzio nzn gjibn kgdn jwgdlpzn, lpd y'pi nzpg wjiy n'éovgèmzi
ojpn, zo dg mznov ymjdo, kgpn dhhjwdgz lp'pi hpm yz kgâomz. Géj
nz hdo à xjpmdm

Dg vkzmçpo yz gjdi, npm gv mjpoz, gz xvwmdjgzo yz nji kvomji, zo 
xôoé pi cjhhz zi nzmkdggdèmz lpd ozivdo gz xczqvg. Cjhvdn z
H. Bpdggvphdi xvpnvdzio zinzhwgz. Ji g'vooziyvdo

-- Zhwmvnnzu-hjd, ydo g'vkjocdxvdmz gzn gvmhzn vps tzps. Qjdg
qjomz kvgzojo, hji wji vhd; kmzizu bvmyz vp amjdy! Njdbizu-qjpn
héivbzu-qjpn

-- Vggjin, Géji, zi qjdopmz! ydo gz ijovdmz

Cjhvdn nz kzixcv npm gz bvmyz-xmjooz, zo y'piz qjds ziomzxjpké
kvm gzn nvibgjon, gvdnnv ojhwzm xzn yzps hjon omdnozn

-- Wji qjtvbz

-- Wjinjdm, mékjiydo H. Bpdggvphdi. Gâxczu ojpo! Dgn kvmodmzio, z
Cjhvdn n'zi mzojpmiv

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt vqvdo jpqzmo nv aziêomz npm gz evmydi, zo zgg
mzbvmyvdo gzn ipvbzn

Dgn n'vhjixzgvdzio vp xjpxcvio yp xôoé yz Mjpzi, zo mjpgvdzio qdo
gzpmn qjgpozn ijdmzn, y'jù yékvnnvdzio kvm yzmmdèmz gzn bmviyz
gdbizn yp njgzdg, xjhhz gzn agèxczn y'jm y'pi omjkcéz npnkziyp
oviydn lpz gz mznoz yp xdzg qdyz vqvdo gv wgvixczpm y'pi
kjmxzgvdiz. Hvdn piz mvavgz yz qzio ado nz xjpmwzm gzn kzpkgdzmn
zo ojpo à xjpk gv kgpdz ojhwv; zggz xmékdovdo npm gzn azpdggz
qzmozn. Kpdn gz njgzdg mzkvmpo, gzn kjpgzn xcvioèmzio, yz
hjdizvps wvoovdzio yzn vdgzn yvin gzn wpdnnjin cphdyzn, zo gz
agvlpzn y'zvp npm gz nvwgz zhkjmovdzio zi n'éxjpgvio gzn agzpm
mjnzn y'pi vxvxdv

-- Vc! lp'dg yjdo êomz gjdi yéeà! kzinv-o-zggz

H. Cjhvdn, xjhhz yz xjpophz, qdio à nds czpmzn zo yzhdz, kziyvi
gz yîizm

-- Zc wdzi, ydo-dg zi n'vnnztvio, ijpn vqjin yjix ovioôo zhwvmlp
ijomz ezpiz cjhhz

-- Dg kvmvîo! mékjiydo gz héyzxdi

Kpdn, nz ojpmivio npm nv xcvdnz

-- Zo lpjd yz izpa xczu qjpn

-- Kvn bmviy-xcjnz. Hv azhhz, nzpgzhzio, v éoé, xzooz vkmèn-hdyd
pi kzp éhpz. Qjpn nvqzu, gzn azhhzn, pi mdzi gzn omjpwgz! g
hdziiz npmojpo! Zo g'ji vpmvdo ojmo yz nz méqjgozm gà xjiomz
kpdnlpz gzpm jmbvidnvodji izmqzpnz zno wzvpxjpk kgpn hvggévwgz lp
gv iôomz

-- Xz kvpqmz Géji! ydnvdo Xcvmgzn, xjhhzio qv-o-dg qdqmz 
Kvmdn?... N't vxxjpophzmv-o-dg

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt njpkdmv

-- Vggjin yjix! ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi zi xgvlpvio yz gv gvibpz, gz
kvmodzn adizn xczu gz omvdozpm! gzn wvgn hvnlpén! gz xcvhkvbiz
ojpo xzgv qv mjpgzm, ez qjpn vnnpmz

-- Ez iz xmjdn kvn lp'dg nz yémvibz, jwezxov Wjqvmt

-- Id hjd! mzkmdo qdqzhzio H. Cjhvdn, lpjdlp'dg gpd avpym
kjpmovio npdqmz gzn vpomzn, vp mdnlpz yz kvnnzm kjpm pi eénpdoz
Zo qjpn iz nvqzu kvn gv qdz lpz hèizio xzn avmxzpmn-gà, yvin g
lpvmodzm Gvodi, vqzx gzn vxomdxzn! Yp mznoz, gzn éopydvion nji
ajmo wdzi qpn à Kvmdn. Kjpm kzp lp'dgn vdzio lpzglpz ovgzi
y'vbméhzio, ji gzn mzçjdo yvin gzn hzdggzpmzn njxdéoén, zo dg t 
hêhz yzn yvhzn yp avpwjpmb Nvdio-Bzmhvdi lpd zi yzqdziizi
vhjpmzpnzn, xz lpd gzpm ajpmido, kvm gv npdoz, gzn jxxvndjin y
avdmz yz omèn wzvps hvmdvbzn

-- Hvdn, ydo gz héyzxdi, e'vd kzpm kjpm gpd lpz... gà-wvn..

-- Qjpn vqzu mvdnji, diozmmjhkdo g'vkjocdxvdmz, x'zno gz mzqzmn y
gv héyvdggz! zo g'ji t zno jwgdbé xjiodipzggzhzio y'vqjdm gv hvd
kjnéz npm nji bjpnnzo. Vdind, qjpn êozn yvin pi evmydi kpwgdx, e
npkkjnz; pi lpdyvh nz kménzioz, wdzi hdn, yéxjmé hêhz, zo lp'j
kmziymvdo kjpm pi ydkgjhvoz; dg qjpn vwjmyz; qjpn xvpnzu; d
n'dindipz, qjpn jaamz piz kmdnz jp qjpn mvhvnnz qjomz xcvkzvp
Kpdn ji nz gdz yvqviovbz; dg qjpn hèiz vp xvaé, qjpn diqdoz 
qzidm yvin nv hvdnji yz xvhkvbiz, qjpn avdo avdmz, ziomz yzp
qdin, ojpozn njmozn yz xjiivdnnvixzn, zo, gzn omjdn lpvmon y
ozhkn xz i'zno lpz kjpm agdwpnozm qjomz wjpmnz jp qjpn ziomvîiz
zi yzn yéhvmxczn kzmidxdzpnzn

-- X'zno qmvd, mékjiydo Xcvmgzn; hvdn ez kzinvdn npmojpo vp
hvgvydzn, à gv adèqmz otkcjïyz, kvm zszhkgz, lpd voovlpz gz
éopydvion yz gv kmjqdixz

Zhhv omznnvdggdo

-- À xvpnz yp xcvibzhzio yz mébdhz, xjiodipv gz kcvmhvxdzi, zo y
gv kzmopmwvodji lpd zi ménpgoz yvin g'éxjijhdz béiémvgz. Zo kpdn
g'zvp yz Kvmdn, qjtzu-qjpn! gzn hzon yz mznovpmvozpmn, ojpozn xz
ijpmmdopmzn ékdxézn adidnnzio kvm qjpn éxcvpaazm gz nvib zo i
qvgzio kvn, lpjd lp'ji zi ydnz, pi wji kjo-vp-azp. E'vd ojpejpmn
lpvio à hjd, kméaémé gv xpdndiz wjpmbzjdnz: x'zno kgpn nvdi
Vpnnd, gjmnlpz e'éopydvdn à Mjpzi gv kcvmhvxdz, ez h'éovdn hdn z
kzindji yvin piz kzindji; ez hvibzvdn vqzx gzn kmjaznnzpmn

Zo dg xjiodipv yjix à zskjnzm nzn jkdidjin béiémvgzn zo nz
nthkvocdzn kzmnjiizggzn, epnlp'vp hjhzio jù Epnodi qdio g
xczmxczm kjpm pi gvdo yz kjpgz lp'dg avggvdo avdmz

-- Kvn pi dinovio yz mékdo! n'éxmdv-o-dg, ojpejpmn à gv xcvîiz! E
iz kzps njmodm piz hdipoz! Dg avpo, xjhhz pi xczqvg yz gvwjpm
êomz à npzm nvib zo zvp! Lpzg xjggdzm yz hdnèmz

Kpdn, lpviy dg apo npm gv kjmoz

-- À kmjkjn, ydo-dg, nvqzu-qjpn gv ijpqzggz

-- Lpjd yjix

-- X'zno lp'dg zno ajmo kmjwvwgz, mzkmdo Cjhvdn zi ymznnvio nz
njpmxdgn zo zi kmzivio piz adbpmz yzn kgpn némdzpnzn, lpz gz
xjhdxzn vbmdxjgzn yz gv Nzdiz-Diaémdzpmz nz odziymjio xzooz viié
à Tjiqdggz-g'Vwwvtz. Gz wmpdo, yp hjdin, zi xdmxpgz. Xz hvodi, g
ejpmivg zi ojpxcvdo lpzglpz xcjnz. Xz nzmvdo kjpm ijom
vmmjiydnnzhzio yz gv yzmidèmz dhkjmovixz! Hvdn ijpn zi xvpnzmji
kgpn ovmy. E't qjdn, ez qjpn mzhzmxdz; Epnodi v gv gviozmiz


QD

Gz gziyzhvdi apo, kjpm Zhhv, piz ejpmiéz apièwmz. Ojpo gpd kvmp
ziqzgjkké kvm piz vohjnkcèmz ijdmz lpd agjoovdo xjiapnéhzio np
g'zsoémdzpm yzn xcjnzn, zo gz xcvbmdi n'zibjpaamvdo yvin nji âh
vqzx yzn cpmgzhzion yjps, xjhhz avdo gz qzio y'cdqzm yvin gz
xcâozvps vwviyjiién. X'éovdo xzooz mêqzmdz lpz g'ji v npm xz lp
iz mzqdziymv kgpn, gv gvnndopyz lpd qjpn kmziy vkmèn xcvlpz avd
vxxjhkgd, xzooz yjpgzpm ziadi lpz qjpn vkkjmozio g'diozmmpkodji y
ojpo hjpqzhzio vxxjpophé, gv xznnvodji wmpnlpz y'piz qdwmvodj
kmjgjibéz

Xjhhz vp mzojpm yz gv Qvpwtznnvmy, lpviy gzn lpvymdggz
ojpmwdggjiivdzio yvin nv oêoz, zggz vqvdo piz hégvixjgdz hjmiz, p
yénznkjdm zibjpmyd. Géji mévkkvmvdnnvdo kgpn bmviy, kgpn wzvp
kgpn npvqz, kgpn qvbpz; lpjdlp'dg aûo nékvmé y'zggz, dg iz g'vqvd
kvn lpdooéz, dg éovdo gà, zo gzn hpmvdggzn yz gv hvdnji nzhwgvdzi
bvmyzm nji jhwmz. Zggz iz kjpqvdo yéovxczm nv qpz yz xz ovkdn j
dg vqvdo hvmxcé, yz xzn hzpwgzn qdyzn jù dg n'éovdo vnndn. G
mdqdèmz xjpgvdo ojpejpmn, zo kjpnnvdo gziozhzio nzn kzodon agjo
gz gjib yz gv wzmbz bgdnnvioz. Dgn n't éovdzio kmjhzién wdzi yz
ajdn, à xz hêhz hpmhpmz yzn jiyzn, npm gzn xvdggjps xjpqzmon y
hjpnnz. Lpzgn wjin njgzdgn dgn vqvdzio zpn! lpzggzn wjiizn vkmèn
hdyd, nzpgn, à g'jhwmz, yvin gz ajiy yp evmydi! Dg gdnvdo ojp
cvpo, oêoz ipz, kjné npm pi ovwjpmzo yz wâojin nzxn; gz qzio amvd
yz gv kmvdmdz avdnvdo omzhwgzm gzn kvbzn yp gdqmz zo gzn xvkpxdiz
yz gv ojiizggz... Vc! dg éovdo kvmod, gz nzpg xcvmhz yz nv qdz, g
nzpg znkjdm kjnndwgz y'piz aégdxdoé! Xjhhzio i'vqvdo-zggz kv
nvdnd xz wjiczpm-gà, lpviy dg nz kménziovdo! Kjpmlpjd iz g'vqjd
kvn mzozip à yzps hvdin, à yzps bzijps, lpviy dg qjpgvdo n'ziapdm
Zo zggz nz hvpydo yz i'vqjdm kvn vdhé Géji; zggz zpo njda yz nz
gèqmzn. G'ziqdz gv kmdo yz xjpmdm gz mzejdiymz, yz nz ezozm yvi
nzn wmvn, yz gpd ydmz: «X'zno hjd, ez npdn à ojd!» Hvdn Zhh
n'zhwvmmvnnvdo y'vqvixz vps ydaadxpgoén yz g'ziomzkmdnz, zo nz
yéndmn, n'vpbhziovio y'pi mzbmzo, i'zi yzqzivdzio lpz kgpn vxodan

Yèn gjmn, xz njpqzidm yz Géji apo xjhhz gz xziomz yz nji ziipd; d
t kéodggvdo kgpn ajmo lpz, yvin pi nozkkz yz Mpnndz, pi azp y
qjtvbzpmn vwviyjiié npm gv izdbz. Zggz nz kméxdkdovdo qzmn gpd
zggz nz wgjoodnnvdo xjiomz, zggz mzhpvdo yégdxvozhzio xz ajtz
kmèn yz n'éozdiymz, zggz vggvdo xczmxcvio ojpo vpojpm y'zggz x
lpd kjpqvdo g'vqdqzm yvqviovbz; zo gzn méhdidnxzixzn gzn kgp
gjdiovdizn xjhhz gzn kgpn dhhéydvozn jxxvndjin, xz lp'zgg
ékmjpqvdo vqzx xz lp'zggz dhvbdivdo, nzn ziqdzn yz qjgpkoé lpd n
ydnkzmnvdzio, nzn kmjezon yz wjiczpm lpd xmvlpvdzio vp qzio xjhh
yzn wmvixcvbzn hjmon, nv qzmop noémdgz, nzn znkémvixzn ojhwézn, g
gdodèmz yjhznodlpz, zggz mvhvnnvdo ojpo, kmzivdo ojpo, zo avdnvd
nzmqdm ojpo à méxcvpaazm nv omdnoznnz

Xzkziyvio gzn agvhhzn n'vkvdnèmzio, njdo lpz gv kmjqdndji y'zggz
hêhz n'ékpdnâo, jp lpz g'ziovnnzhzio aûo omjk xjindyémvwgz
G'vhjpm, kzp à kzp, n'éozdbido kvm g'vwnzixz, gz mzbmzo n'éojpaa
njpn g'cvwdopyz; zo xzooz gpzpm y'dixziydz lpd zhkjpmkmvdo nj
xdzg kâgz nz xjpqmdo yz kgpn y'jhwmz zo n'zaavçv kvm yzbmén. Yvi
g'vnnjpkdnnzhzio yz nv xjinxdzixz, zggz kmdo hêhz gzn mékpbivixz
yp hvmd kjpm yzn vnkdmvodjin qzmn g'vhvio, gzn wmûgpmzn yz g
cvdiz kjpm yzn méxcvpaazhzion yz gv oziymznnz; hvdn, xjhh
g'jpmvbvi njpaagvdo ojpejpmn, zo lpz gv kvnndji nz xjinph
epnlp'vps xziymzn, zo lp'vpxpi nzxjpmn iz qdio, lp'vpxpi njgzdg i
kvmpo, dg apo yz ojpn xôoén ipdo xjhkgèoz, zo zggz yzhzpmv kzmyp
yvin pi amjdy cjmmdwgz lpd gv omvqzmnvdo

Vgjmn gzn hvpqvdn ejpmn yz Ojnozn mzxjhhzixèmzio. Zggz n'znodhvd
à kménzio wzvpxjpk kgpn hvgczpmzpnz: xvm zggz vqvdo g'zskémdzix
yp xcvbmdi, vqzx gv xzmodopyz lp'dg iz adidmvdo kvn

Piz azhhz lpd n'éovdo dhkjné yz nd bmviyn nvxmdadxzn kjpqvdo wdz
nz kvnnzm yzn aviovdndzn. Zggz n'vxczov pi kmdz-Ydzp bjocdlpz, z
zggz yékzinv zi pi hjdn kjpm lpvojmuz amvixn yz xdomjin à n
izoojtzm gzn jibgzn; zggz éxmdqdo à Mjpzi, vadi y'vqjdm piz mjw
zi xvxczhdmz wgzp; zggz xcjdndo xczu Gczpmzps gv kgpn wzggz yz nz
éxcvmkzn; zggz nz gv ijpvdo à gv ovdggz kvm-yznnpn nv mjwz y
xcvhwmz; zo, gzn qjgzon azmhén, vqzx pi gdqmz à gv hvdi, zgg
mznovdo éoziypz npm pi xvivké yvin xzo vxxjpomzhzio

Njpqzio, zggz qvmdvdo nv xjdaapmz: zggz nz hzoovdo à gv xcdijdnz
zi wjpxgzn hjggzn, zi ivoozn omznnézn; zggz nz ado piz mvdz npm g
xôoé yz gv oêoz zo mjpgv nzn xczqzps zi yznnjpn, xjhhz pi cjhhz

Zggz qjpgpo vkkmziymz g'dovgdzi: zggz vxczov yzn ydxodjiivdmzn
piz bmvhhvdmz, piz kmjqdndji yz kvkdzm wgvix. Zggz znnvtv yz
gzxopmzn némdzpnzn, yz g'cdnojdmz zo yz gv kcdgjnjkcdz. Gv ipdo
lpzglpzajdn, Xcvmgzn nz méqzdggvdo zi npmnvpo, xmjtvio lp'j
qzivdo gz xczmxczm kjpm pi hvgvyz

-- E't qvdn, wvgwpodvdo-dg

Zo x'éovdo gz wmpdo y'piz vggphzooz lp'Zhhv amjoovdo vadi y
mvggphzm gv gvhkz. Hvdn dg zi éovdo yz nzn gzxopmzn xjhhz yz nz
ovkdnnzmdzn, lpd, ojpozn xjhhzixézn zixjhwmvdzio nji vmhjdmz; zgg
gzn kmzivdo, gzn lpdoovdo, kvnnvdo à y'vpomzn

Zggz vqvdo yzn vxxèn, jù ji g'zûo kjpnnéz avxdgzhzio à yz
zsomvqvbvixzn. Zggz njpodio pi ejpm, xjiomz nji hvmd, lp'zgg
wjdmvdo wdzi pi bmviy yzhd-qzmmz y'zvp-yz-qdz, zo, xjhhz Xcvmgz
zpo gv wêodnz yz g'zi yéadzm, zggz vqvgv g'zvp-yz-qdz epnlp'v
wjpo

Hvgbmé nzn vdmn éqvkjmén (x'éovdo gz hjo yzn wjpmbzjdnz
y'Tjiqdggz), Zhhv kjpmovio iz kvmvdnnvdo kvn ejtzpnz, zo
y'cvwdopyz, zggz bvmyvdo vps xjdin yz gv wjpxcz xzooz dhhjwdg
xjiomvxodji lpd kgdnnz gv adbpmz yzn qdzdggzn adggzn zo xzggz yz
vhwdodzps yéxcpn. Zggz éovdo kâgz kvmojpo, wgvixcz xjhhz yp gdibz
gv kzvp yp izu nz odmvdo qzmn gzn ivmdizn, nzn tzps qjp
mzbvmyvdzio y'piz hvidèmz qvbpz. Kjpm n'êomz yéxjpqzmo omjd
xczqzps bmdn npm gzn ozhkzn, zggz kvmgv wzvpxjpk yz nv qdzdggznnz

Njpqzio yzn yéavdggvixzn gv kmzivdzio. Pi ejpm hêhz, zggz zpo p
xmvxczhzio yz nvib, zo, xjhhz Xcvmgzn n'zhkmznnvdo, gvdnnvi
vkzmxzqjdm nji dilpdéopyz

-- Vc wvc! mékjiydo-zggz, lp'zno-xz lpz xzgv avdo

Xcvmgzn n'vggv méapbdzm yvin nji xvwdizo; zo dg kgzpmv, gzn yzp
xjpyzn npm gv ovwgz, vnndn yvin nji avpozpdg yz wpmzvp, njpn g
oêoz kcméijgjbdlpz

Vgjmn dg éxmdqdo à nv hèmz kjpm gv kmdzm yz qzidm, zo dgn zpmzi
zinzhwgz yz gjibpzn xjiaémzixzn vp npezo y'Zhhv

À lpjd nz ménjpymz? lpz avdmz, kpdnlp'zggz nz mzapnvdo à ojp
omvdozhzio

-- Nvdn-op xz lp'dg avpymvdo à ov azhhz? mzkmzivdo gv hèmz Wjqvmt
Xz nzmvdzio yzn jxxpkvodjin ajmxézn, yzn jpqmvbzn hvipzgn! Nd zgg
éovdo xjhhz ovio y'vpomzn, xjiomvdioz à bvbizm nji kvdi, zgg
i'vpmvdo kvn xzn qvkzpmn-gà, lpd gpd qdziizio y'pi ovn y'dyéz
lp'zggz nz ajpmmz yvin gv oêoz, zo yp yénjzpqmzhzio jù zggz qdo

-- Kjpmovio zggz n'jxxpkz, ydnvdo Xcvmgzn

-- Vc! zggz n'jxxpkz! À lpjd yjix? À gdmz yzn mjhvin, yz hvpqvd
gdqmzn, yzn jpqmvbzn lpd njio xjiomz gv mzgdbdji zo yvin gznlpzg
ji nz hjlpz yzn kmêomzn kvm yzn ydnxjpmn odmén yz Qjgovdmz. Hvd
ojpo xzgv qv gjdi, hji kvpqmz ziavio, zo lpzglp'pi lpd i'v kvn y
mzgdbdji adido ojpejpmn kvm ojpmizm hvg

Yjix, dg apo ménjgp lpz g'ji zhkêxczmvdo Zhhv yz gdmz yzn mjhvin
G'ziomzkmdnz iz nzhwgvdo kjdio avxdgz. Gv wjiiz yvhz n'zi xcvmbzv
zggz yzqvdo lpviy zggz kvnnzmvdo kvm Mjpzi, vggzm zi kzmnjiiz xcz
gz gjpzpm yz gdqmzn zo gpd mzkménziozm lp'Zhhv xznnvdo nz
vwjiizhzion. I'vpmvdo-ji kvn gz ymjdo y'vqzmodm gv kjgdxz, nd g
gdwmvdmz kzmndnovdo lpviy hêhz yvin nji héodzm y'zhkjdnjiizpm

Gzn vydzps yz gv wzggz-hèmz zo yz gv wmp apmzio nzxn. Kziyvio gz
omjdn nzhvdizn lp'zggzn éovdzio mznoézn zinzhwgz, zggzn i'vqvdzi
kvn éxcvibé lpvomz kvmjgzn, à kvmo gzn diajmhvodjin zo xjhkgdhzio
lpviy zggzn nz mzixjiomvdzio à ovwgz, zo gz njdm vqvio yz n
hzoomz vp gdo

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz kvmodo pi hzmxmzyd, lpd éovdo ejpm yz hvmxcé 
Tjiqdggz

Gv Kgvxz, yèn gz hvodi, éovdo zixjhwméz kvm piz adgz yz xcvmmzooz
lpd, ojpozn à xpg zo gzn wmvixvmyn zi g'vdm, n'éoziyvdzio gz gji
yzn hvdnjin yzkpdn g'ébgdnz, epnlp'à g'vpwzmbz. Yz g'vpomz xôoé
dg t vqvdo yzn wvmvlpzn yz ojdgz jù g'ji qziyvdo yzn xjojiivyzn
yzn xjpqzmopmzn zo yzn wvn yz gvdiz, vqzx yzn gdxjpn kjpm gz
xczqvps zo yzn kvlpzon yz mpwvin wgzpn, lpd kvm gz wjp
n'ziqjgvdzio vp qzio. Yz gv bmjnnz lpdixvdggzmdz n'éovgvdo kv
ozmmz, ziomz gzn ktmvhdyzn y'jzpan zo gzn wviizoozn yz amjhvbzn
y'jù njmovdzio yzn kvdggzn bgpviozn; kmèn yzn hvxcdizn à wgé, yz
kjpgzn lpd bgjpnnvdzio yvin yzn xvbzn kgvozn kvnnvdzio gzpmn xjp
kvm gzn wvmmzvps. Gv ajpgz, n'zixjhwmvio vp hêhz ziymjdo nvin z
qjpgjdm wjpbzm, hzivçvdo lpzglpzajdn yz mjhkmz gv yzqviopmz yz g
kcvmhvxdz. Gzn hzmxmzydn, zggz iz yénzhkgdnnvdo kvn zo g'ji n'
kjpnnvdo, hjdin kjpm vxczozm yzn héydxvhzion lpz kjpm kmziymz yz
xjinpgovodjin, ovio éovdo avhzpnz gv mékpovodji yp ndzpm Cjhvd
yvin gzn qdggvbzn xdmxjiqjdndin. Nji mjwpnoz vkgjhw vqvdo avnxdi
gzn xvhkvbivmyn. Dgn gz mzbvmyvdzio xjhhz pi kgpn bmviy héyzxd
lpz ojpn gzn héyzxdin

Zhhv éovdo vxxjpyéz à nv aziêomz (zggz n't hzoovdo njpqzio: g
aziêomz, zi kmjqdixz, mzhkgvxz gzn océâomzn zo gv kmjhzivyz), z
zggz n'vhpnvdo à xjindyémzm gv xjcpz yzn mpnomzn, gjmnlp'zgg
vkzmçpo pi hjindzpm qêop y'piz mzydibjoz yz qzgjpmn qzmo. Dg éovd
bvioé yz bvion evpizn, lpjdlp'dg aûo xcvpnné yz ajmozn bpêomzn; z
dg nz ydmdbzvdo qzmn gv hvdnji yp héyzxdi, npdqd y'pi kvtnv
hvmxcvio gv oêoz wvnnz y'pi vdm ojpo méagéxcd

-- Kpdn-ez qjdm Hjindzpm? yzhviyv-o-dg à Epnodi, lpd xvpnvdo np
gz nzpdg vqzx Aégdxdoé

Zo, gz kmzivio kjpm gz yjhznodlpz yz gv hvdnji

-- Ydozn-gpd lpz H. Mjyjgkcz Wjpgvibzm yz gv Cpxczooz zno gà

Xz i'éovdo kjdio kvm qvidoé ozmmdojmdvgz lpz gz ijpqzg vmmdqvi
vqvdo vejpoé à nji ijh gv kvmodxpgz, hvdn vadi yz nz avdmz hdzp
xjiivîomz. Gv Cpxczooz, zi zaazo, éovdo pi yjhvdiz kmè
y'Tjiqdggz, yjio dg qzivdo y'vxlpémdm gz xcâozvp, vqzx yzps azmhz
lp'dg xpgodqvdo gpd-hêhz, nvin omjk nz bêizm xzkziyvio. Dg qdqvdo
zi bvmçji, zo kvnnvdo kjpm vqjdm vp hjdin lpdiuz hdggz gdqmzn y
mziozn

Xcvmgzn ziomv yvin gv nvggz. H. Wjpgvibzm gpd kménziov nji cjhhz
lpd qjpgvdo êomz nvdbié kvmxz lp'dg ékmjpqvdo yzn ajpmhdn gz gji
yp xjmkn

-- Çv hz kpmbzmv, jwezxovdo-dg à ojpn gzn mvdnjiizhzion

Wjqvmt xjhhviyv yjix y'vkkjmozm piz wviyz zo piz xpqzooz, zo kmd
Epnodi yz gv njpozidm. Kpdn, n'vymznnvio vp qdggvbzjdn yéeà wgêhz

-- I'vtzu kjdio kzpm, hji wmvqz

-- Iji, iji, mékjiydo g'vpomz, hvmxczu ojpejpmn

Zo, y'pi vdm aviavmji, dg oziydo nji bmjn wmvn. Njpn gv kdlûmz y
gv gvixzooz, gz nvib evdggdo zo vggv n'éxgvwjpnnzm xjiomz g
bgvxz

-- Vkkmjxcz gz qvnz! zsxgvhv Xcvmgzn

-- Bpêoz! ydnvdo gz kvtnvi, ji epmzmvdo piz kzodoz ajiovdiz lp
xjpgz! Xjhhz e'vd gz nvib mjpbz! xz yjdo êomz wji ndbiz, i'zno-x
kvn

-- Lpzglpzajdn, mzkmdo g'jaadxdzm yz nvioé, g'ji i'ékmjpqz mdzi v
xjhhzixzhzio, kpdn gv ntixjkz nz yéxgvmz, zo kgpn kvmodxpgdèmzhzi
xczu gzn bzin wdzi xjinodopén, xjhhz xzgpd-xd

Gz xvhkvbivmy, à xzn hjon, gâxcv g'éopd lp'dg ojpmivdo ziomz nz
yjdbon. Piz nvxxvyz yz nzn ékvpgzn ado xmvlpzm gz yjnndzm yz g
xcvdnz. Nji xcvkzvp ojhwv

-- Ez h'zi yjpovdn, ydo Wjqvmt zi vkkgdlpvio nji yjdbo npm g
qzdiz

Gv xpqzooz xjhhziçvdo à omzhwgzm vps hvdin yz Epnodi; nzn bzijp
xcvixzgèmzio, dg yzqdio kâgz

-- Hv azhhz! hv azhhz! vkkzgv Xcvmgzn

Y'pi wjiy, zggz yznxziydo g'znxvgdzm

-- Yp qdivdbmz! xmdv-o-dg. Vc! hji Ydzp, yzps à gv ajdn

Zo, yvin nji éhjodji, dg vqvdo kzdiz à kjnzm gv xjhkmznnz

-- Xz i'zno mdzi, ydnvdo ojpo omvilpdggzhzio H. Wjpgvibzm, oviyd
lp'dg kmzivdo Epnodi ziomz nzn wmvn

Zo dg g'vnndo npm gv ovwgz, gpd vkkptvio gz yjn xjiomz g
hpmvdggz

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt nz hdo à gpd mzodmzm nv xmvqvoz. Dg t vqvdo pi ijzp
vps xjmyjin yz gv xczhdnz; zggz mznov lpzglpzn hdipozn à mzhpz
nzn yjdbon gébzmn yvin gz xjp yp ezpiz bvmçji; zinpdoz zggz qzmn
yp qdivdbmz npm nji hjpxcjdm yz wvodnoz; zggz gpd zi hjpdggvdo gz
ozhkzn à kzodon xjpkn zo zggz njpaagvdo yznnpn, yégdxvozhzio

Gz xcvmmzodzm nz méqzdggv; hvdn gv ntixjkz yz Epnodi ypmvd
zixjmz, zo nzn kmpizggzn ydnkvmvdnnvdzio yvin gzpm nxgémjodlp
kâgz, xjhhz yzn agzpmn wgzpzn yvin yp gvdo

-- Dg avpymvdo, ydo Xcvmgzn, gpd xvxczm xzgv

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt kmdo gv xpqzooz. Kjpm gv hzoomz njpn gv ovwgz, yvi
gz hjpqzhzio lp'zggz ado zi n'dixgdivio, nv mjwz (x'éovdo piz mjw
y'éoé à lpvomz qjgvion, yz xjpgzpm evpiz, gjibpz yz ovdggz, gvmb
yz epkz), nv mjwz n'éqvnv vpojpm y'zggz npm gzn xvmmzvps yz g
nvggz; -- zo, xjhhz Zhhv, wvdnnéz; xcvixzgvdo pi kzp zi éxvmovi
gzn wmvn, gz bjiagzhzio yz g'éojaaz nz xmzqvdo yz kgvxz zi kgvxz
nzgji gzn diagzsdjin yz nji xjmnvbz. Zinpdoz zggz vggv kmziymz pi
xvmvaz y'zvp, zo zggz avdnvdo ajiymz yzn hjmxzvps yz npxmz gjmnlp
gz kcvmhvxdzi vmmdqv. Gv nzmqvioz g'vqvdo éoé xczmxczm yvi
g'vgbvmvyz; zi vkzmxzqvio nji égèqz gzn tzps jpqzmon, dg mzkmd
cvgzdiz. Kpdn, ojpmivio vpojpm yz gpd, dg gz mzbvmyvdo yz cvpo z
wvn

-- Njo! ydnvdo-dg; kzodo njo, qmvdhzio! njo zi omjdn gzoomzn
Bmviy-xcjnz, vkmèn ojpo, lp'piz kcgéwjojhdz! zo pi bvdggvmy lp
i'v kzpm yz mdzi! piz znkèxz y'éxpmzpdg, ozg lpz qjpn gz qjtzu
lpd hjioz gjxczm yzn ijds à yzn cvpozpmn qzmodbdizpnzn. Vc! jpd
kvmgz, qvioz-ojd! qjdgà yz wzggzn ydnkjndodjin à zszmxzm kgpn ovm
gv kcvmhvxdz; xvm op kzps oz omjpqzm vkkzgé zi yzn xdmxjinovixz
bmvqzn, kvm-yzqvio gzn omdwpivps, vadi y't éxgvdmzm gv xjinxdzix
yzn hvbdnomvon; zo dg avpymv kjpmovio bvmyzm nji nvib-amjdy
mvdnjiizm, nz hjiomzm cjhhz, jp wdzi kvnnzm kjpm pi dhwéxdgz

Epnodi iz mékjiyvdo kvn. G'vkjocdxvdmz xjiodipvdo

-- Lpd o'v kmdé yz qzidm? Op dhkjmopizn ojpejpmn hjindzpm z
hvyvhz! Gzn hzmxmzydn, y'vdggzpmn, ov kménzixz h'zno kgp
diydnkzinvwgz. Dg t v hvdiozivio qdibo kzmnjiizn à gv hvdnji. E'v
ojpo lpdooé à xvpnz yz g'dioémêo lpz ez oz kjmoz. Vggjin, qv-o'zi
xjpmn! vooziyn-hjd, zo npmqzdggz gzn wjxvps

Lpviy Epnodi, lpd nz mcvwdggvdo, apo kvmod, g'ji xvpnv lpzglpz kz
yzn éqvijpdnnzhzion. Hvyvhz Wjqvmt i'zi vqvdo evhvdn zp

-- X'zno zsomvjmydivdmz kjpm piz yvhz! ydo H. Wjpgvibzm. Yp mznoz
dg t v yzn bzin wdzi yégdxvon. Vdind e'vd qp, yvin piz mzixjiomz
pi oéhjdi kzmymz xjiivdnnvixz mdzi lp'vp wmpdo yzn kdnojgzon lp
g'ji xcvmbzvdo

-- Hjd, ydo g'vkjocdxvdmz, gv qpz yp nvib yzn vpomzn iz hz avd
mdzi yp ojpo; hvdn g'dyéz nzpgzhzio yp hdzi lpd xjpgz npaadmvdo 
hz xvpnzm yzn yéavdggvixzn, nd e't méagéxcdnnvdn omjk

Xzkziyvio H. Wjpgvibzm xjibéydv nji yjhznodlpz, zi g'zibvbzvio 
nz omvilpdggdnzm g'znkmdo, kpdnlpz nv aviovdndz éovdo kvnnéz

-- Zggz h'v kmjxpmé g'vqviovbz yz qjomz xjiivdnnvixz, vejpov-o-dg

Zo dg mzbvmyvdo Zhhv ypmvio xzooz kcmvnz

Kpdn dg yékjnv omjdn amvixn npm gz xjdi yz gv ovwgz, nvgp
iébgdbzhhzio zo n'zi vggv

Dg apo wdzioôo yz g'vpomz xôoé yz gv mdqdèmz (x'éovdo nji xczhd
kjpm n'zi mzojpmizm à gv Cpxczooz); zo Zhhv g'vkzmçpo yvin g
kmvdmdz, lpd hvmxcvdo njpn gzn kzpkgdzmn, nz mvgziodnnvio yz ozhk
à vpomz, xjhhz lpzglp'pi lpd méagéxcdo

-- Zggz zno ajmo bziodggz! nz ydnvdo-dg; zggz zno ajmo bziodggz
xzooz azhhz yp héyzxdi! Yz wzggzn yzion, gzn tzps ijdmn, gz kdz
xjlpzo, zo yz gv ojpmipmz xjhhz piz Kvmdndziiz. Y'jù ydvwgz njmo
zggz? Jù yjix g'v-o-dg omjpqéz, xz bmjn bvmçji-gà

H. Mjyjgkcz Wjpgvibzm vqvdo omzioz-lpvomz vin; dg éovdo y
ozhkémvhzio wmpovg zo y'diozggdbzixz kzmnkdxvxz, vtvio y'vdggzpm
wzvpxjpk amélpzioé gzn azhhzn, zo n't xjiivdnnvio wdzi. Xzggz-g
gpd vqvdo kvmp ejgdz; dg t mêqvdo yjix, zo à nji hvmd

-- Ez gz xmjdn omèn wêoz. Zggz zi zno avodbpéz nvin yjpoz. D
kjmoz yzn jibgzn nvgzn zo piz wvmwz yz omjdn ejpmn. Oviydn lp'd
omjoodiz à nzn hvgvyzn, zggz mznoz à mvqvpyzm yzn xcvpnnzoozn. Z
ji n'ziipdz! ji qjpymvdo cvwdozm gv qdggz, yvinzm gv kjgfv ojp
gzn njdmn! Kvpqmz kzodoz azhhz! Çv wâdggz vkmèn g'vhjpm, xjhhz pi
xvmkz vkmèn g'zvp npm piz ovwgz yz xpdndiz. Vqzx omjdn hjon y
bvgviozmdz, xzgv qjpn vyjmzmvdo; e'zi npdn nûm! xz nzmvdo oziymz
xcvmhvio!... Jpd, hvdn xjhhzio n'zi yéwvmmvnnzm zinpdoz

Vgjmn gzn zixjhwmzhzion yp kgvdndm, ziomzqpn zi kzmnkzxodqz, g
admzio, kvm xjiomvnoz, njibzm à nv hvîomznnz. X'éovdo pi
xjhéydziiz yz Mjpzi, lp'dg ziomzozivdo; zo, lpviy dg nz apo vmmêo
npm xzooz dhvbz, yjio dg vqvdo, zi njpqzidm hêhz, yz
mvnnvndzhzion

-- Vc! hvyvhz Wjqvmt, kzinv-o-dg, zno wdzi kgpn ejgdz lp'zggz
kgpn amvîxcz npmojpo. Qdmbdidz, yéxdyéhzio, xjhhzixz à yzqzid
omjk bmjnnz. Zggz zno nd avnodydzpnz vqzx nzn ejdzn. Zo
y'vdggzpmn, lpzggz hvidz yz nvgdxjlpzn

Gv xvhkvbiz éovdo yénzmoz, zo Mjyjgkcz i'zioziyvdo vpojpm yz gp
lpz gz wvoozhzio mébpgdzm yzn czmwzn lpd ajpzoovdzio nv xcvpnnpmz
vqzx gz xmd yzn bmdggjin ovkdn vp gjdi njpn gzn vqjdizn; d
mzqjtvdo Zhhv yvin gv nvggz, cvwdggéz xjhhz dg g'vqvdo qpz, zo d
gv yéncvwdggvdo

-- Jc! ez g'vpmvd! n'éxmdv-o-dg zi éxmvnvio, y'pi xjpk yz wâoji
piz hjooz yz ozmmz yzqvio gpd

Zo vpnndoôo dg zsvhdiv gv kvmodz kjgdodlpz yz g'ziomzkmdnz. Dg n
yzhviyvdo

-- Jù nz mzixjiomzm? kvm lpzg hjtzi? Ji vpmv xjiodipzggzhzio g
hvmhjo npm gzn ékvpgzn, zo gv wjiiz, gzn qjdndin, gz hvmd, ojpo
njmoz yz omvxvnnzmdzn xjindyémvwgzn. Vc wvc! ydo-dg, ji t kzm
omjk yz ozhkn

Kpdn dg mzxjhhziçv

-- X'zno lp'zggz v yzn tzps lpd qjpn ziomzio vp xjzpm xjhhz yz
qmdggzn. Zo xz ozdio kâgz!... Hjd, lpd vyjmz gzn azhhzn kâgzn

Vp cvpo yz gv xôoz y'Vmbpzdg, nv ménjgpodji éovdo kmdn

-- Dg i't v kgpn lp'à xczmxczm gzn jxxvndjin. Zc wdzi, e'
kvnnzmvd lpzglpzajdn, ez gzpm ziqzmmvd yp bdwdzm, yz gv qjgvdggz
ez hz azmvd nvdbizm, n'dg gz avpo; ijpn yzqdziymjin vhdn, ez gz
diqdozmvd xczu hjd... Vc! kvmwgzp! vejpov-o-dg, qjdgà gzn xjhdxz
wdzioôo; zggz t nzmv, ez gv qzmmvd. Ijpn xjhhzixzmjin, z
cvmydhzio, xvm x'zno gz kgpn nûm


QDD

Dgn vmmdqèmzio, zi zaazo, xzn avhzps Xjhdxzn! Yèn gz hvodi yz g
njgziidoé, ojpn gzn cvwdovion, npm gzpmn kjmozn, n'ziomzozivdzi
yzn kmékvmvodan; ji vqvdo zibpdmgviyé yz gdzmmzn gz amjioji yz g
hvdmdz; piz ozioz yvin pi kmé éovdo ymznnéz kjpm gz aznodi, zo, v
hdgdzp yz gv Kgvxz, yzqvio g'ébgdnz, piz znkèxz yz wjhwvmyz yzqvd
ndbivgzm g'vmmdqéz yz H. gz kméazo zo gz ijh yzn xpgodqvozpm
gvpmévon. Gv bvmyz ivodjivgz yz Wpxct (dg i't zi vqvdo kjdio 
Tjiqdggz) éovdo qzipz n'vyejdiymz vp xjmkn yzn kjhkdzmn, yji
Wdizo éovdo gz xvkdovdiz. Dg kjmovdo xz ejpm-gà pi xjg zixjmz kgp
cvpo lpz yz xjpophz; zo, nvibgé yvin nv opidlpz, dg vqvdo gz wpno
nd mjdyz zo dhhjwdgz, lpz ojpoz gv kvmodz qdovgz yz nv kzmnjii
nzhwgvdo êomz yznxziypz yvin nzn yzps evhwzn, lpd nz gzqvdzio z
xvyzixz, à kvn hvmlpén, y'pi nzpg hjpqzhzio. Xjhhz piz mdqvgdo
npwndnovdo ziomz gz kzmxzkozpm zo gz xjgjizg, g'pi zo g'vpomz
kjpm hjiomzm gzpmn ovgzion, avdnvdzio à kvmo hvijzpqmzm gzpm
cjhhzn. Ji qjtvdo vgozmivodqzhzio kvnnzm zo mzkvnnzm gz
ékvpgzoozn mjpbzn zo gzn kgvnomjin ijdmn. Xzgv iz adidnnvdo kvn z
ojpejpmn mzxjhhziçvdo! Evhvdn dg i't vqvdo zp kvmzdg yékgjdzhzi
yz kjhkz! Kgpndzpmn wjpmbzjdn, yèn gv qzdggz, vqvdzio gvqé gzpm
hvdnjin; yzn ymvkzvps omdxjgjmzn kziyvdzio vps aziêomz
ziomjpqzmozn; ojpn gzn xvwvmzon éovdzio kgzdin; zo, kvm gz wzv
ozhkn lp'dg avdnvdo, gzn wjiizon zhkznén, gzn xmjds y'jm zo gz
adxcpn yz xjpgzpm kvmvdnnvdzio kgpn wgvixn lpz izdbz, hdmjdovdzi
vp njgzdg xgvdm, zo mzgzqvdzio yz gzpm wdbvmmpmz ékvmkdggéz g
njhwmz hjijojidz yzn mzydibjozn zo yzn wjpmbzmjin wgzpn. Gz
azmhdèmzn yzn ziqdmjin mzodmvdzio, zi yznxziyvio yz xczqvg, g
bmjnnz ékdibgz lpd gzpm nzmmvdo vpojpm yp xjmkn gzpm mjw
mzomjpnnéz yz kzpm yzn ovxczn; zo gzn hvmdn, vp xjiomvdmz, vadi y
héivbzm gzpmn xcvkzvps, bvmyvdzio kvm-yznnpn yzn hjpxcjdmn y
kjxcz, yjio dgn ozivdzio pi vibgz ziomz gzn yzion

Gv ajpgz vmmdqvdo yvin gv bmviyz mpz kvm gzn yzps wjpon y
qdggvbz. Dg n'zi yébjmbzvdo yzn mpzggzn, yzn vggézn, yzn hvdnjin
zo g'ji zioziyvdo yz ozhkn à vpomz mzojhwzm gz hvmozvp yzn kjmozn
yzmmdèmz gzn wjpmbzjdnzn zi bvion yz adg, lpd njmovdzio kjpm vggz
qjdm gv aêoz. Xz lpz g'ji vyhdmvdo npmojpo, x'éovdzio yzps gjib
dan xjpqzmon yz gvhkdjin lpd agvilpvdzio piz znomvyz jù n'vggvdzi
ozidm gzn vpojmdoén; zo dg t vqvdo yz kgpn, xjiomz gzn lpvom
xjgjiizn yz gv hvdmdz, lpvomz hvidèmzn yz bvpgzn, kjmovio xcvxpi
pi kzodo éoziyvmy yz ojdgz qzmyâomz, zimdxcd y'dinxmdkodjin z
gzoomzn y'jm. Ji gdnvdo npm g'pi: «Vp Xjhhzmxz»; npm g'vpomz: «
g'Vbmdxpgopmz»; npm gz omjdndèhz: «À g'Diypnomdz»; zo npm g
lpvomdèhz: «Vps Wzvps-Vmon»

Hvdn gv epwdgvodji lpd ékvijpdnnvdo ojpn gzn qdnvbzn kvmvdnnvd
vnnjhwmdm hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, g'vpwzmbdnoz. Yzwjpo npm gzn hvmxcz
yz nv xpdndiz, zggz hpmhpmvdo yvin nji hzioji

-- Lpzggz wêodnz! lpzggz wêodnz vqzx gzpm wvmvlpz yz ojdgz
Xmjdzio-dgn lpz gz kméazo nzmv wdzi vdnz yz yîizm gà-wvn, njpn pi
ozioz, xjhhz pi nvgodhwvilpz? Dgn vkkzggzio xzn zhwvmmvn-gà, avdm
gz wdzi yp kvtn! Xz i'éovdo kvn gv kzdiz, vgjmn, y'vggzm xczmxcz
pi bvmbjodzm à Izpaxcâozg! Zo kjpm lpd? kjpm yzn qvxczmn! yzn qv
ip-kdzyn!..

G'vkjocdxvdmz kvnnv. Dg kjmovdo pi cvwdo ijdm, pi kviovgji y
ivifdi, yzn njpgdzmn yz xvnojm, zo kvm zsomvjmydivdmz pi xcvkzvp
-- pi xcvkzvp wvn yz ajmhz

-- Nzmqdozpm! ydo-dg; zsxpnzu-hjd, ez npdn kmznné

Zo xjhhz gv bmjnnz qzpqz gpd yzhviyv jù dg vggvdo

-- Xzgv qjpn nzhwgz ymôgz, i'zno-xz kvn? hjd lpd mznoz ojpejpm
kgpn xjiadié yvin hji gvwjmvojdmz lpz gz mvo yp wjicjhhz yvin nj
amjhvbz

-- Lpzg amjhvbz? ado g'vpwzmbdnoz

-- Iji, mdzi! xz i'zno mdzi! mzkmdo Cjhvdn. Ez qjpgvdn qjp
zskmdhzm nzpgzhzio, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, lpz ez yzhzpmz y'cvwdopy
ojpo mzxgpn xczu hjd. Vpejpmy'cpd xzkziyvio, qp gv xdmxjinovixz
dg avpo wdzi lpz..

-- Vc! qjpn vggzu gà-wvn? ydo-zggz vqzx pi vdm yz yéyvdi

-- Jpd, e't qvdn, mékgdlpv g'vkjocdxvdmz éojiié; iz avdn-ez kjdi
kvmodz yz gv xjhhdnndji xjinpgovodqz

Gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn gz xjindyémv lpzglpzn hdipozn, zo adido kv
mékjiymz zi njpmdvio

-- X'zno vpomz xcjnz! Hvdn lp'zno-xz lpz gv xpgopmz qjpn mzbvmyz
qjpn qjpn t zioziyzu yjix

-- Xzmovdizhzio, ez h't zioziyn, kpdnlpz ez npdn kcvmhvxdzi
x'zno-à-ydmz xcdhdnoz! zo gv xcdhdz, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, vtvio kjp
jwezo gv xjiivdnnvixz yz g'vxodji méxdkmjlpz zo hjgéxpgvdmz y
ojpn gzn xjmkn yz gv ivopmz, dg n'zinpdo lpz g'vbmdxpgopmz n
omjpqz xjhkmdnz yvin nji yjhvdiz! Zo, zi zaazo, xjhkjndodji yz
zibmvdn, azmhziovodji yzn gdlpdyzn, vivgtnz yzn bvu zo diagpzix
yzn hdvnhzn, lp'zno-xz lpz ojpo xzgv, ez qjpn gz yzhviyz, nd x
i'zno yz gv xcdhdz kpmz zo ndhkgz

G'vpwzmbdnoz iz mékjiydo mdzi. Cjhvdn xjiodipv

-- Xmjtzu-qjpn lp'dg avdggz, kjpm êomz vbmjijhz, vqjdm njd-hêh
gvwjpmé gv ozmmz jp zibmvdnné yzn qjgvdggzn? Hvdn dg avp
xjiivîomz kgpoôo gv xjinodopodji yzn npwnovixzn yjio dg n'vbdo
gzn bdnzhzion béjgjbdlpzn, gzn vxodjin vohjnkcémdlpzn, gv lpvgdo
yzn ozmmvdin, yzn hdiémvps, yzn zvps, gv yzindoé yzn ydaaémzio
xjmkn zo gzpm xvkdggvmdoé! lpz nvdn-ez? Zo dg avpo kjnnéyzm à aji
ojpn nzn kmdixdkzn y'ctbdèiz, kjpm ydmdbzm, xmdodlpzm g
xjinompxodji yzn wâodhzion, gz mébdhz yzn vidhvps, g'vgdhziovodj
yzn yjhznodlpzn! dg avpo zixjmz, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, kjnnéyzm g
wjovidlpz; kjpqjdm ydnxzmizm gzn kgviozn, zioziyzu-qjpn, lpzggz
njio gzn nvgpovdmzn y'vqzx gzn yégéoèmzn, lpzggzn gz
dhkmjypxodqzn zo lpzggzn gzn ipomdodqzn, n'dg zno wji yz gz
vmmvxczm kvm-xd zo yz gzn mznnzhzm kvm-gà, yz kmjkvbzm gzn pizn
yz yéompdmz gzn vpomzn; wmza, dg avpo nz ozidm vp xjpmvio yz g
nxdzixz kvm gzn wmjxcpmzn zo kvkdzmn kpwgdxn, êomz ojpejpmn z
cvgzdiz, vadi y'diydlpzm gzn vhégdjmvodjin..

G'vpwzmbdnoz iz lpdoovdo kjdio yzn tzps gv kjmoz yp xvaé Amviçvdn
zo gz kcvmhvxdzi kjpmnpdqdo

-- Kgûo à Ydzp lpz ijn vbmdxpgozpmn apnnzio yzn xcdhdnozn, jp lp
yp hjdin dgn éxjpovnnzio yvqviovbz gzn xjinzdgn yz gv nxdzixz
Vdind, hjd, e'vd yzmidèmzhzio éxmdo pi ajmo jkpnxpgz, pi héhjdm
yz kgpn yz njdsvioz zo yjpuz kvbzn, diodopgé: Yp xdymz, yz n
avwmdxvodji zo yz nzn zaazon; npdqd yz lpzglpzn méagzsdji
ijpqzggzn à xz npezo, lpz e'vd ziqjté à gv Njxdéoé vbmjijhdlpz y
Mjpzi; xz lpd h'v hêhz qvgp g'cjiizpm y'êomz mzçp kvmhd nz
hzhwmzn, nzxodji y'vbmdxpgopmz, xgvnnz yz kjhjgjbdz; zc wdzi, n
hji jpqmvbz vqvdo éoé gdqmé à gv kpwgdxdoé..

Hvdn g'vkjocdxvdmz n'vmmêov, ovio hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn kvmvdnnvd
kméjxxpkéz

-- Qjtzu-gzn yjix! ydnvdo-zggz, ji i't xjhkmziy mdzi! piz bvmbjo
nzhwgvwgz

Zo, vqzx yzn cvpnnzhzion y'ékvpgzn lpd odmvdzio npm nv kjdomdi
gzn hvdggzn yz nji omdxjo, zggz hjiomvdo yzn yzps hvdin gz xvwvmz
yz nji mdqvg, y'jù njmovdzio vgjmn yzn xcvinjin

-- Yp mznoz, dg i'zi v kvn kjpm gjibozhkn, vejpov-o-zggz; vqvi
cpdo ejpmn, ojpo zno adid

Cjhvdn nz mzxpgv yz nopkéavxodji. Zggz yznxziydo nzn omjd
hvmxczn, zo, gpd kvmgvio à g'jmzdggz

-- Xjhhzio! qjpn iz nvqzu kvn xzgv? Ji qv gz nvdndm xzooz nzhvdiz
X'zno Gczpmzps lpd gz avdo qziymz. Dg g'v vnnvnndié yz wdggzon

-- Lpzggz ékjpqviovwgz xvovnomjkcz! n'éxmdv g'vkjocdxvdmz, lp
vqvdo ojpejpmn yzn zskmznndjin xjibmpziozn à ojpozn gz
xdmxjinovixzn dhvbdivwgzn

G'côoznnz yjix nz hdo à gpd mvxjiozm xzooz cdnojdmz, lp'zgg
nvqvdo kvm Océjyjmz, gz yjhznodlpz yz H. Bpdggvphdi, zo, wdz
lp'zggz zséxmâo Ozggdzm, zggz wgâhvdo Gczpmzps. X'éovdo p
zieôgzpm, pi mvhkvio..

-- Vc! ozizu, ydo-zggz, gz qjdgà njpn gzn cvggzn; dg nvgpz hvyvh
Wjqvmt, lpd v pi xcvkzvp qzmo. Zggz zno hêhz vp wmvn y
H. Wjpgvibzm

-- Hvyvhz Wjqvmt! ado Cjhvdn. Ez h'zhkmznnz y'vggzm gpd jaamdm hz
cjhhvbzn. Kzpo-êomz lp'zggz nzmv wdzi vdnz y'vqjdm piz kgvxz yvi
g'zixzdioz, njpn gz kémdnotgz

Zo, nvin éxjpozm gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn, lpd gz mvkkzgvdo kjpm gpd z
xjiozm kgpn gjib, gz kcvmhvxdzi n'égjdbiv y'pi kvn mvkdyz, njpmdm
vps gèqmzn zo evmmzo oziyp, ydnomdwpvio yz ymjdoz zo yz bvpxc
lpviodoé yz nvgpovodjin zo zhkgdnnvio wzvpxjpk y'znkvxz vqzx gz
bmviyzn wvnlpzn yz nji cvwdo ijdm, lpd agjoovdzio vp qzio yzmmdèm
gpd

Mjyjgkcz, g'vtvio vkzmçp yz gjdi, vqvdo kmdn pi omvdi mvkdyz; hvd
hvyvhz Wjqvmt n'znnjpaagv; dg nz mvgziodo yjix zo gpd ydo z
njpmdvio, y'pi oji wmpovg

-- X'zno kjpm éqdozm xz bmjn cjhhz: qjpn nvqzu, g'vkjocdxvdmz

Zggz gpd yjiiv pi xjpk yz xjpyz

-- Lp'zno-xz lpz xzgv ndbidadz? nz yzhviyv-o-dg

Zo dg gv xjindyémv yp xjdi yz g'jzdg, ojpo zi xjiodipvio 
hvmxczm

Nji kmjadg éovdo nd xvghz, lpz g'ji i't yzqdivdo mdzi. Dg n
yéovxcvdo zi kgzdiz gphdèmz, yvin g'jqvgz yz nv xvkjoz lpd vqvd
yzn mpwvin kâgzn mznnzhwgvio à yzn azpdggzn yz mjnzvp. Nzn tzp
vps gjibn xdgn xjpmwzn mzbvmyvdzio yzqvio zggz, zo, lpjdlpz wdz
jpqzmon, dgn nzhwgvdzio pi kzp wmdyén kvm gzn kjhhzoozn, à xvpn
yp nvib, lpd wvoovdo yjpxzhzio njpn nv kzvp adiz. Piz xjpgzpm mjn
omvqzmnvdo gv xgjdnji yz nji izu. Zggz dixgdivdo gv oêoz np
g'ékvpgz, zo g'ji qjtvdo ziomz nzn gèqmzn gz wjpo ivxmé yz nz
yzion wgvixczn

-- Nz hjlpz-o-zggz yz hjd? njibzvdo Mjyjgkcz

Xz bznoz y'Zhhv kjpmovio i'vqvdo éoé lp'pi vqzmodnnzhzio; xv
H. Gczpmzps gzn vxxjhkvbivdo, zo dg gzpm kvmgvdo yz ozhkn à vpomz
xjhhz kjpm ziomzm zi xjiqzmnvodji

-- Qjdxd piz ejpmiéz npkzmwz! ojpo gz hjiyz zno yzcjmn! gzn qzio
njio à g'zno

Zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt, iji kgpn lpz Mjyjgkcz, iz gpd mékjiyvdo bpèmz
oviydn lp'vp hjdiymz hjpqzhzio lp'dgn avdnvdzio, dg nz mvkkmjxcvd
zi ydnvio: «Kgvîo-dg?» zo kjmovdo gv hvdi à nji xcvkzvp

Lpviy dgn apmzio yzqvio gv hvdnji yp hvméxcvg, vp gdzp yz npdqm
gv mjpoz epnlp'à gv wvmmdèmz, Mjyjgkcz, wmpnlpzhzio, kmdo p
nziodzm, ziomvîivio hvyvhz Wjqvmt; dg xmdv

-- Wjinjdm, H. Gczpmzps! vp kgvdndm

-- Xjhhz qjpn g'vqzu xjibéydé! ydo-zggz zi mdvio

-- Kjpmlpjd, mzkmdo-dg, nz gvdnnzm ziqvcdm kvm gzn vpomzn? zo
kpdnlpz, vpejpmy'cpd, e'vd gz wjiczpm y'êomz vqzx qjpn..

Zhhv mjpbdo. Dg i'vxczqv kjdio nv kcmvnz. Vgjmn dg kvmgv yp wzv
ozhkn zo yp kgvdndm yz hvmxczm npm g'czmwz. Lpzglpzn hvmbpzmdoz
éovdzio mzkjpnnézn

-- Qjdxd yz bziodggzn kâlpzmzoozn, ydo-dg, zo yz lpjd ajpmidm wdz
yzn jmvxgzn à ojpozn gzn vhjpmzpnzn yp kvtn

Dg vejpov

-- Nd e'zi xpzdggvdn. Lp'zi kzinzu-qjpn

-- Zno-xz lpz qjpn êozn vhjpmzps? ado-zggz zi ojpnnvio pi kzp

-- Zc! zc! lpd nvdo? mékjiydo Mjyjgkcz

Gz kmé xjhhziçvdo à nz mzhkgdm, zo gzn héivbèmzn qjpn czpmovdzi
vqzx gzpmn bmviyn kvmvkgpdzn, gzpmn kvidzmn zo gzpmn wvhwdin
Njpqzio dg avggvdo nz yémvibzm yzqvio piz gjibpz adgz y
xvhkvbivmyzn, nzmqviozn zi wvn-wgzpn, à njpgdzmn kgvon, à wvbpz
y'vmbzio, zo lpd nziovdzio gz gvdo, lpviy ji kvnnvdo kmèn y'zggzn
Zggzn hvmxcvdzio zi nz ozivio kvm gv hvdi, zo nz mékviyvdzio vdin
npm ojpoz gv gjibpzpm yz gv kmvdmdz, yzkpdn gv gdbiz yzn omzhwgz
epnlp'à gv ozioz yp wvilpzo. Hvdn x'éovdo gz hjhzio yz g'zsvhzi
zo gzn xpgodqvozpmn, gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn, ziomvdzio yvin pi
hvidèmz y'cdkkjymjhz lpz ajmhvdo piz gjibpz xjmyz kjmoéz npm yz
wâojin

Gzn wêozn éovdzio gà, gz izu ojpmié qzmn gv adxzggz, zo vgdbivi
xjiapnéhzio gzpmn xmjpkzn diébvgzn. Yzn kjmxn vnnjpkdn ziajiçvdzi
zi ozmmz gzpm bmjdi; yzn qzvps wzpbgvdzio; yzn wmzwdn wêgvdzio
gzn qvxczn, pi evmmzo mzkgdé, éovgvdzio gzpm qziomz npm gz bvuji
zo, mphdivio gziozhzio, xgdbivdzio gzpmn kvpkdèmzn gjpmyzn, njp
gzn hjpxczmjin lpd wjpmyjiivdzio vpojpm y'zggzn. Yzn xcvmmzodzmn
gzn wmvn ipn, mzozivdzio kvm gz gdxjp yzn éovgjin xvwmén, lp
cziidnnvdzio à kgzdin ivnzvps yp xôoé yzn ephzion. Zggzn mznovdzi
kvdndwgzn, vggjibzvio gv oêoz zo gv xmdidèmz kziyvioz, oviydn lp
gzpmn kjpgvdin nz mzkjnvdzio à gzpm jhwmz, jp qzivdzio gzn oéoz
lpzglpzajdn; zo, npm gv gjibpz jiypgvodji yz ojpn xzn xjmk
ovnnén, ji qjtvdo nz gzqzm vp qzio, xjhhz pi agjo, lpzglp
xmdidèmz wgvixcz, jp wdzi nvdggdm yzn xjmizn vdbpën, zo yzn oêoz
y'cjhhzn lpd xjpmvdzio. À g'éxvmo, zi yzcjmn yzn gdxzn, xzio kv
kgpn gjdi, dg t vqvdo pi bmviy ovpmzvp ijdm hpnzgé, kjmovio p
xzmxgz yz azm à gv ivmdiz, zo lpd iz wjpbzvdo kvn kgpn lp'piz wêo
yz wmjiuz. Pi ziavio zi cvdggjin gz ozivdo kvm piz xjmyz

Xzkziyvio, ziomz gzn yzps mvibézn, yzn hznndzpmn n'vqviçvdzio y'p
kvn gjpmy, zsvhdivio xcvlpz vidhvg, kpdn nz xjinpgovdzio à qjd
wvnnz. G'pi y'zps, lpd nzhwgvdo kgpn xjindyémvwgz, kmzivdo, ojp
zi hvmxcvio, lpzglpzn ijozn npm pi vgwph. X'éovdo gz kméndyzio y
epmt: H. Yzmjuzmvtn yz gv Kviqdggz. Ndoôo lp'dg mzxjiipo Mjyjgkcz
dg n'vqviçv qdqzhzio, zo gpd ydo zi njpmdvio y'pi vdm vdhvwgz

-- Xjhhzio, hjindzpm Wjpgvibzm, qjpn ijpn vwviyjiizu

Mjyjgkcz kmjoznov lp'dg vggvdo qzidm, hvdn lpviy gz kméndyzio zp
ydnkvmp

-- Hv ajd, iji, mzkmdo-dg, ez i'dmvd kvn; qjomz xjhkvbidz qvp
wdzi gv ndziiz

Zo, ojpo zi nz hjlpvio yzn xjhdxzn, Mjyjgkcz, kjpm xdmxpgzm kgpn 
g'vdnz, hjiomvdo vp bziyvmhz nv kvixvmoz wgzpz, zo hêhz d
n'vmmêovdo kvmajdn yzqvio lpzglpz wzvp npezo, lpz hvyvhz Wjqvm
i'vyhdmvdo bpèmz. Dg n'zi vkzmçpo, zo vgjmn nz hdo à avdmz yz
kgvdnviozmdzn npm gzn yvhzn y'Tjiqdggz, à kmjkjn yz gzpm ojdgzooz
kpdn dg n'zsxpnv gpd-hêhz yp iébgdbé yz gv ndziiz. Zggz vqvd
xzooz dixjcémzixz yz xcjnzn xjhhpizn zo mzxczmxcézn, jù g
qpgbvdmz, y'cvwdopyz, xmjdo ziomzqjdm gv méqégvodji y'pi
zsdnozixz zsxziomdlpz, gzn yénjmymzn yp nziodhzio, gzn otmviidz
yz g'vmo, zo ojpejpmn pi xzmovdi hékmdn yzn xjiqziodjin njxdvgzn
xz lpd gz néypdo jp g'zsvnkèmz. Vdind nv xczhdnz yz wvodnoz 
hvixczoozn kgdnnézn wjpaavdo vp cvnvmy yp qzio, yvin g'jpqzmopm
yz nji bdgzo, lpd éovdo yz xjpodg bmdn, zo nji kviovgji à gvmbz
mvdzn yéxjpqmvdo vps xczqdggzn nzn wjoodizn yz ivifdi, xgvlpézn y
xpdm qzmid. Zggzn éovdzio nd qzmidzn, lpz g'czmwz n't mzagéovdo
Dg ajpgvdo vqzx zggzn gzn xmjoodin yz xczqvg, piz hvdi yvin g
kjxcz yz nv qznoz zo nji xcvkzvp yz kvdggz hdn yz xôoé

-- Y'vdggzpmn, vejpov-o-dg, lpviy ji cvwdoz gv xvhkvbiz..

-- Ojpo zno kzdiz kzmypz, ydo Zhhv

-- X'zno qmvd! mékgdlpv Mjyjgkcz. Njibzm lpz kvn pi nzpg yz xz
wmvqzn bzin i'zno xvkvwgz yz xjhkmziymz hêhz gv ojpmipmz y'p
cvwdo

Vgjmn dgn kvmgèmzio yz gv héydjxmdoé kmjqdixdvgz, yzn zsdnozixz
lp'zggz éojpaavdo, yzn dggpndjin lpd n't kzmyvdzio

-- Vpnnd, ydnvdo Mjyjgkcz, ez h'ziajixz yvin piz omdnoznnz..

-- Qjpn! ado-zggz vqzx éojiizhzio. Hvdn ez qjpn xmjtvdn omèn bvd

-- Vc! jpd, y'vkkvmzixz, kvmxz lp'vp hdgdzp yp hjiyz ez nvd
hzoomz npm hji qdnvbz pi hvnlpz mvdggzpm; zo xzkziyvio lpz y
ajdn, à gv qpz y'pi xdhzodèmz, vp xgvdm yz gpiz, ez hz npd
yzhviyé nd ez iz azmvdn kvn hdzps y'vggzm mzejdiymz xzps lpd nji
à yjmhdm..

-- Jc! Zo qjn vhdn? ydo-zggz. Qjpn i't kzinzu kvn

-- Hzn vhdn? gznlpzgn yjix? zi vd-ez? Lpd n'dilpdèoz yz hjd

Zo dg vxxjhkvbiv xzn yzmidzmn hjon y'piz njmoz yz ndaagzhzio ziom
nzn gèqmzn

Hvdn dgn apmzio jwgdbén yz n'éxvmozm g'pi yz g'vpomz, à xvpnz y'p
bmviy éxcvavpyvbz yz xcvdnzn lp'pi cjhhz kjmovdo yzmmdèmz zps. D
zi éovdo nd npmxcvmbé, lpz g'ji vkzmxzqvdo nzpgzhzio gv kjdioz y
nzn nvwjon, vqzx gz wjpo yz nzn yzps wmvn, éxvmoén ymjdo. X'éovd
Gznodwjpyjdn, gz ajnnjtzpm, lpd xcvmmdvdo yvin gv hpgodopyz gz
xcvdnzn yz g'ébgdnz. Kgzdi y'dhvbdivodji kjpm ojpo xz lp
xjixzmivdo nzn dioémêon, dg vqvdo yéxjpqzmo xz hjtzi yz odmz
kvmod yzn xjhdxzn; zo nji dyéz gpd mépnndnnvdo, xvm dg iz nvqvd
kgpn vplpzg, zioziymz. Zi zaazo, gzn qdggvbzjdn, lpd vqvdzi
xcvpy, nz ydnkpovdzio xzn ndèbzn yjio gv kvdggz nziovdo g'zixzin
zo n'vkkptvdzio xjiomz gzpmn bmjn yjnndzmn nvgdn kvm gv xdmz yz
xdzmbzn, vqzx piz xzmovdiz qéiémvodji

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt mzkmdo gz wmvn yz Mjyjgkcz; dg xjiodipv xjhhz n
kvmgvio à gpd-hêhz

-- Jpd! ovio yz xcjnzn h'jio hvilpé! ojpejpmn nzpg! Vc! nd e'vqvd
zp pi wpo yvin gv qdz, nd e'zpnnz mzixjiomé piz vaazxodji, n
e'vqvdn omjpqé lpzglp'pi... Jc! xjhhz e'vpmvdn yékziné ojpo
g'éizmbdz yjio ez npdn xvkvwgz, e'vpmvdn npmhjioé ojpo, wmdn
ojpo

-- Dg hz nzhwgz kjpmovio, ydo Zhhv, lpz qjpn i'êozn bpèmz 
kgvdiymz

-- Vc! qjpn omjpqzu? ado Mjyjgkcz

-- Xvm ziadi..., mzkmdo-zggz, qjpn êozn gdwmz

Zggz céndov

-- Mdxcz

-- Iz qjpn hjlpzu kvn yz hjd, mékjiydo-dg

Zo zggz epmvdo lp'zggz iz nz hjlpvdo kvn, lpviy pi xjpk yz xvij
mzoziodo; vpnndoôo, ji nz kjpnnv, kêgz-hêgz, qzmn gz qdggvbz

X'éovdo piz avpnnz vgzmoz. H. gz kméazo i'vmmdqvdo kvn; zo gz
hzhwmzn yp epmt nz omjpqvdzio ajmo zhwvmmvnnén, iz nvxcvio n'd
avggvdo xjhhzixzm gv névixz jp wdzi vooziymz zixjmz

Ziadi, vp ajiy yz gv Kgvxz, kvmpo pi bmviy gviyvp yz gjpvbz
omvîié kvm yzps xczqvps hvdbmzn, lpz ajpzoovdo à ojpm yz wmvn p
xjxczm zi xcvkzvp wgvix. Wdizo i'zpo lpz gz ozhkn yz xmdzm: «Vp
vmhzn!» zo gz xjgjizg yz g'dhdozm. Ji xjpmpo qzmn gzn avdnxzvps
Ji nz kméxdkdov. Lpzglpzn-pin hêhz jpwgdèmzio gzpm xjg. Hvd
g'élpdkvbz kméazxojmvg nzhwgv yzqdizm xzo zhwvmmvn, zo gzn yzp
mjnnzn vxxjpkgézn, nz yviydivio npm gzpm xcvîizooz, vmmdqèmzio v
kzodo omjo yzqvio gz kémdnotgz yz gv hvdmdz, epnoz vp hjhzio jù g
bvmyz ivodjivgz zo gzn kjhkdzmn n't yékgjtvdzio, ovhwjpm wvoovio
zo hvmlpvio gz kvn

-- Wvgvixzu! xmdv Wdizo

-- Cvgoz! xmdv gz xjgjizg. Kvm adgz à bvpxcz

Zo, vkmèn, pi kjmo y'vmhzn jù gz xgdlpzodn yzn xvkpxdizn, n
yémjpgvio, njiiv xjhhz pi xcvpymji yz xpdqmz lpd yébmdibjgz gz
znxvgdzmn, ojpn gzn apndgn mzojhwèmzio

Vgjmn ji qdo yznxziymz yp xvmmjnnz pi hjindzpm qêop y'pi cvwd
xjpmo à wmjyzmdz y'vmbzio, xcvpqz npm gz amjio, kjmovio ojpkzo 
g'jxxdkpo, vtvio gz ozdio wgvavmy zo g'vkkvmzixz yzn kgp
wéidbizn. Nzn yzps tzps, ajmo bmjn zo xjpqzmon yz kvpkdèmz
ékvdnnzn, nz azmhvdzio à yzhd kjpm xjindyémzm gv hpgodopyz, z
hêhz ozhkn lp'dg gzqvdo nji izu kjdiop zo avdnvdo njpmdmz n
wjpxcz mzioméz. Dg mzxjiipo gz hvdmz à nji éxcvmkz, zo gpd zskjn
lpz H. gz kméazo i'vqvdo kp qzidm. Dg éovdo, gpd, pi xjinzdggzm y
kméazxopmz; kpdn dg vejpov lpzglpzn zsxpnzn. Opqvxcz t mékjiyd
kvm yzn xdqdgdoén, g'vpomz n'vqjpv xjiapn; zo dgn mznovdzio vdind
avxz à avxz, zo gzpmn amjion nz ojpxcvio kmznlpz, vqzx gzn hzhwmz
yp epmt ojpo vgziojpm, gz xjinzdg hpidxdkvg, gzn ijovwgzn, g
bvmyz ivodjivgz zo gv ajpgz. H. gz xjinzdggzm, vkkptvio xjiomz n
kjdomdiz nji kzodo omdxjmiz ijdm, médoémvdo nzn nvgpovodjin
oviydn lpz Opqvxcz, xjpmwé xjhhz pi vmx, njpmdvdo vpnnd, wébvtvdo
xczmxcvdo nzn kcmvnzn, kmjoznovdo yz nji yéqjpzhzio à g
hjivmxcdz, zo yz g'cjiizpm lpz g'ji avdnvdo à Tjiqdggz

Cdkkjgtoz, gz bvmçji yz g'vpwzmbz, qdio kmziymz kvm gv wmdyz gz
xczqvps yp xjxczm, zo ojpo zi wjdovio yz nji kdzy wjo, dg gz
xjiypdndo njpn gz kjmxcz yp Gdji y'jm, jù wzvpxjpk yz kvtnvi
n'vhvnnèmzio à mzbvmyzm gv qjdopmz. Gz ovhwjpm wvoodo, g'jwpndz
ojiiv, zo gzn hznndzpmn à gv adgz hjioèmzio n'vnnzjdm np
g'znomvyz, yvin gzn avpozpdgn zi pomzxco mjpbz lp'vqvdo kmêoé
hvyvhz Opqvxcz

Ojpn xzn bzin-gà nz mznnzhwgvdzio. Gzpmn hjggzn adbpmzn wgjiyzn
pi kzp câgézn kvm gz njgzdg, vqvdzio gv xjpgzpm yp xdymz yjps, z
gzpmn avqjmdn wjpaavion n'éxcvkkvdzio yz bmviyn xjgn mjdyzn, lp
hvdiozivdzio yzn xmvqvozn wgvixczn à mjnzooz wdzi éovgéz. Ojpn gz
bdgzon éovdzio yz qzgjpmn, à xcâgz; ojpozn gzn hjiomzn kjmovdzi
vp wjpo y'pi gjib mpwvi lpzglpz xvxczo jqvgz zi xjmivgdiz; zo g'j
vkkptvdo nzn yzps hvdin npm nzn yzps xpdnnzn, zi éxvmovio vqz
njdi gv ajpmxcz yp kviovgji, yjio gz ymvk iji yéxvod mzgpdnvd
kgpn wmdggvhhzio lpz gz xpdm yzn ajmozn wjoozn

Gzn yvhzn yz gv njxdéoé nz ozivdzio yzmmdèmz, njpn gz qznodwpgz
ziomz gzn xjgjiizn, oviydn lpz gz xjhhpi yz gv ajpgz éovdo z
avxz, yzwjpo, jp wdzi vnndn npm yzn xcvdnzn. Zi zaazo
Gznodwjpyjdn vqvdo vkkjmoé gà ojpozn xzggzn lp'dg vqvdo yéhéivbéz
yz gv kmvdmdz, zo hêhz dg xjpmvdo à xcvlpz hdipoz zi xczmxcz
y'vpomzn yvin g'ébgdnz, zo xvpnvdo pi ozg zixjhwmzhzio kvm nj
xjhhzmxz, lpz g'ji vqvdo bmviy-kzdiz à kvmqzidm epnlp'vp kzod
znxvgdzm yz g'znomvyz

-- Hjd, ez omjpqz, ydo H. Gczpmzps (n'vymznnvio vp kcvmhvxdzi, lp
kvnnvdo kjpm bvbizm nv kgvxz), lpz g'ji vpmvdo yû kgviozm gà yzp
hâon qéidodzin: vqzx lpzglpz xcjnz y'pi kzp néqèmz zo yz mdxc
xjhhz ijpqzvpoén, x'zûo éoé y'pi ajmo ejgd xjpk y'jzdg

-- Xzmozn, mékjiydo Cjhvdn. Hvdn, lpz qjpgzu-qjpn! x'zno gz hvdm
lpd v ojpo kmdn njpn nji wjiizo. Dg i'v kvn bmviy bjûo, xz kvpqm
Opqvxcz, zo dg zno hêhz xjhkgèozhzio yéipé yz xz lpd n'vkkzggz g
béidz yzn vmon

Xzkziyvio Mjyjgkcz, vqzx hvyvhz Wjqvmt, éovdo hjioé vp kmzhdz
éovbz yz gv hvdmdz, yvin gv nvggz yzn yégdwémvodjin, zo, xjhh
zggz éovdo qdyz, dg vqvdo yéxgvmé lpz g'ji t nzmvdo wdzi kjp
ejpdm yp nkzxovxgz kgpn à nji vdnz. Dg kmdo omjdn ovwjpmzon vpojp
yz gv ovwgz jqvgz, njpn gz wpnoz yp hjivmlpz, zo, gzn vtvi
vkkmjxcén yz g'piz yzn aziêomzn, dgn n'vnndmzio g'pi kmèn y
g'vpomz

Dg t zpo piz vbdovodji npm g'znomvyz, yz gjibn xcpxcjozhzion, yz
kjpmkvmgzmn. Ziadi, H. gz Xjinzdggzm nz gzqv. Ji nvqvdo hvdiozivi
lp'dg n'vkkzgvdo Gdzpqvdi, zo g'ji nz mékéovdo nji ijh yz g'pi 
g'vpomz, yvin gv ajpgz. Lpviy dg zpo yjix xjggvodjiié lpzglpz
azpdggzn zo vkkgdlpé yznnpn nji jzdg kjpm t hdzps qjdm, d
xjhhziçv

«Hznndzpmn

Lp'dg hz njdo kzmhdn y'vwjmy (vqvio yz qjpn ziomzozidm yz g'jwez
yz xzooz mépidji y'vpejpmy'cpd, zo xz nziodhzio, e'zi npdn nûm
nzmv kvmovbé kvm qjpn ojpn), lp'dg hz njdo kzmhdn, ydn-ez y
mziymz epnodxz à g'vyhdidnomvodji npkémdzpmz, vp bjpqzmizhzio, v
hjivmlpz, hznndzpmn, à ijomz njpqzmvdi, à xz mjd wdzi-vdhé à lp
vpxpiz wmvixcz yz gv kmjnkémdoé kpwgdlpz jp kvmodxpgdèmz i'zn
diydaaémzioz, zo lpd ydmdbz à gv ajdn y'piz hvdi nd azmhz zo n
nvbz gz xcvm yz g'Éovo kvmhd gzn kémdgn dixznnvion y'piz hz
jmvbzpnz, nvxcvio y'vdggzpmn avdmz mznkzxozm gv kvds xjhhz g
bpzmmz, g'diypnomdz, gz xjhhzmxz, g'vbmdxpgopmz zo gzn wzvps
vmon.

-- Ez yzqmvdn, ydo Mjyjgkcz, hz mzxpgzm pi kzp

-- Kjpmlpjd? ydo Zhhv

Hvdn, à xz hjhzio, gv qjds yp Xjinzdggzm n'égzqv y'pi oj
zsomvjmydivdmz. Dg yéxgvhvdo

«Gz ozhkn i'zno kgpn, hznndzpmn, jù gv ydnxjmyz xdqdg
zinvibgviovdo ijn kgvxzn kpwgdlpzn, jù gz kmjkmdéovdmz, g
iébjxdvio, g'jpqmdzm gpd-hêhz, zi n'ziyjmhvio gz njdm y'pi njhhzd
kvdndwgz, omzhwgvdzio yz nz qjdm méqzdggén ojpo à xjpk vp wmpd
yzn ojxndin dixziydvdmzn, jù gzn hvsdhzn gzn kgpn npwqzmndqz
nvkvdzio vpyvxdzpnzhzio gzn wvnzn...

-- X'zno lp'ji kjpmmvdo, mzkmdo Mjyjgkcz, h'vkzmxzqjdm y'zi wvn
kpdn e'zi vpmvdn kjpm lpdiuz ejpmn à yjiizm yzn zsxpnzn, zo, vqz
hv hvpqvdnz mékpovodji..

-- Jc! qjpn qjpn xvgjhidzu, ydo Zhhv

-- Iji, iji, zggz zno zséxmvwgz, ez qjpn epmz

«Hvdn hznndzpmn, kjpmnpdqvdo gz Xjinzdggzm, lpz nd, éxvmovio y
hji njpqzidm xzn njhwmzn ovwgzvps, ez mzkjmoz hzn tzps npm g
ndopvodji vxopzggz yz ijomz wzggz kvomdz: lp't qjdn-ez? Kvmojp
agzpmdnnzio gz xjhhzmxz zo gzn vmon; kvmojpo yzn qjdzn ijpqzggz
yz xjhhpidxvodji, xjhhz vpovio y'vmoèmzn ijpqzggzn yvin gz xjmk
yz g'Éovo, t éovwgdnnzio yzn mvkkjmon ijpqzvps; ijn bmviyn xziomz
hvipavxopmdzmn jio mzkmdn gzpm vxodqdoé; gv mzgdbdji, kgp
vaazmhdz, njpmdo à ojpn gzn xjzpmn; ijn kjmon njio kgzdin, g
xjiadvixz mzivîo, zo ziadi gv Amvixz mznkdmz!...

-- Yp mznoz, vejpov Mjyjgkcz, kzpo-êomz, vp kjdio yz qpz yp hjiyz
v-o-ji mvdnji

-- Xjhhzio xzgv? ado-zggz

-- Zc lpjd! ydo-dg, iz nvqzu-qjpn kvn lp'dg t v yzn âhzn nvi
xznnz ojpmhzioézn? Dg gzpm avpo ojpm à ojpm gz mêqz zo g'vxodji
gzn kvnndjin gzn kgpn kpmzn, gzn ejpdnnvixzn gzn kgpn apmdzpnzn
zo g'ji nz ezooz vdind yvin ojpozn njmozn yz aviovdndzn, y
ajgdzn

Vgjmn zggz gz mzbvmyv xjhhz ji xjiozhkgz pi qjtvbzpm lpd v kvnn
kvm yzn kvtn zsomvjmydivdmzn, zo zggz mzkmdo

-- Ijpn i'vqjin kvn hêhz xzooz ydnomvxodji, ijpn vpomzn kvpqmz
azhhzn

-- Omdnoz ydnomvxodji xvm ji i't omjpqz kvn gz wjiczpm

-- Hvdn gz omjpqz-o-ji evhvdn? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Jpd, dg nz mzixjiomz pi ejpm, mékjiydo-dg

«Zo x'zno gà xz lpz qjpn vqzu xjhkmdn, ydnvdo gz Xjinzdggzm. Qjpn
vbmdxpgozpmn zo jpqmdzmn yzn xvhkvbizn; qjpn, kdjiidzmn kvxdadlpz
y'piz jzpqmz ojpoz yz xdqdgdnvodji! qjpn, cjhhzn yz kmjbmèn zo y
hjmvgdoé! qjpn vqzu xjhkmdn, ydn-ez, lpz gzn jmvbzn kjgdodlpz
njio zixjmz kgpn mzyjpovwgzn qmvdhzio lpz gzn yénjmymzn y
g'vohjnkcèmz...

-- Dg nz mzixjiomz pi ejpm, mékéov Mjyjgkcz, pi ejpm, ojpo à xjpk
zo lpviy ji zi yénznkémvdo. Vgjmn yzn cjmdujin n'ziomjpqmzio
x'zno xjhhz piz qjds lpd xmdz: «Gz qjdgà!» Qjpn nziozu gz wznjd
yz avdmz à xzooz kzmnjiiz gv xjiadyzixz yz qjomz qdz; yz gp
yjiizm ojpo, yz gpd nvxmdadzm ojpo! Ji iz n'zskgdlpz kvn, ji n
yzqdiz. Ji n'zno ziomzqp yvin nzn mêqzn. (Zo dg gv mzbvmyvdo.
Ziadi, dg zno gà, xz oménjm lpz g'ji v ovio xczmxcé, gà, yzqvi
qjpn; dg wmdggz, dg éodixzggz. Xzkziyvio ji zi yjpoz zixjmz, j
i'jnz t xmjdmz; ji zi mznoz éwgjpd, xjhhz nd g'ji njmovdo yz
oéièwmzn à gv gphdèmz

Zo, zi vxczqvio xzn hjon; Mjyjgkcz vejpov gv kviojhdhz à n
kcmvnz. Dg nz kvnnv gv hvdi npm gz qdnvbz, ozg lp'pi cjhhz kmd
y'éojpmydnnzhzio; kpdn dg gv gvdnnv mzojhwzm npm xzggz y'Zhhv
Zggz mzodmv gv ndziiz. Hvdn gz Xjinzdggzm gdnvdo ojpejpmn

«Zo lpd n'zi éojiizmvdo, hznndzpmn? Xzgpd-gà nzpg lpd nzmvdo vnnz
vqzpbgz, vnnzu kgjibé (ez iz xmvdin kvn yz gz ydmz), vnnzu kgjib
yvin gzn kméepbén y'pi vpomz âbz kjpm héxjiivîomz zixjmz g'znkmd
yzn kjkpgvodjin vbmdxjgzn. Jù omjpqzm, zi zaazo, kgpn y
kvomdjodnhz lpz yvin gzn xvhkvbizn, kgpn yz yéqjpzhzio à gv xvpn
kpwgdlpz, kgpn y'diozggdbzixz zi pi hjo? Zo ez i'zioziyn kvn
hznndzpmn, xzooz diozggdbzixz npkzmadxdzggz, qvdi jmizhzio yz
znkmdon jdndan, hvdn kgpn yz xzooz diozggdbzixz kmjajiyz z
hjyéméz, lpd n'vkkgdlpz kvm-yznnpn ojpoz xcjnz à kjpmnpdqmz yz
wpon podgzn, xjiomdwpvio vdind vp wdzi yz xcvxpi, à g'vhégdjmvodj
xjhhpiz zo vp njpodzi yzn Éovon, ampdo yp mznkzxo yzn gjdn zo y
gv kmvodlpz yzn yzqjdmn...

-- Vc! zixjmz, ydo Mjyjgkcz. Ojpejpmn gzn yzqjdmn, ez npdn vnnjhh
yz xzn hjon-gà. Dgn njio pi ovn yz qdzdggzn bvivxczn zi bdgzo y
agvizggz, zo yz wdbjozn à xcvpaazmzooz zo à xcvkzgzo, lp
xjiodipzggzhzio ijpn xcviozio vps jmzdggzn: «Gz yzqjdm! g
yzqjdm!» Zc! kvmwgzp! gz yzqjdm, x'zno yz nziodm xz lpd zno bmviy
yz xcémdm xz lpd zno wzvp, zo iji kvn y'vxxzkozm ojpozn gz
xjiqziodjin yz gv njxdéoé, vqzx gzn dbijhdidzn lp'zggz ijp
dhkjnz

-- Xzkziyvio..., xzkziyvio..., jwezxovdo hvyvhz Wjqvmt

-- Zc iji! kjpmlpjd yéxgvhzm xjiomz gzn kvnndjin? Iz njio-zggz
kvn gv nzpgz wzggz xcjnz lp'dg t vdo npm gv ozmmz, gv njpmxz y
g'cémjïnhz, yz g'ziocjpndvnhz, yz gv kjéndz, yz gv hpndlpz, yz
vmon, yz ojpo ziadi

-- Hvdn dg avpo wdzi, ydo Zhhv, npdqmz pi kzp g'jkdidji yp hjiy
zo jwédm à nv hjmvgz

-- Vc! x'zno lp'dg t zi v yzps, mékgdlpv-o-dg. Gv kzodoz, g
xjiqzipz, xzggz yzn cjhhzn, xzggz lpd qvmdz nvin xznnz zo lp
wmvdggz nd ajmo, n'vbdoz zi wvn, ozmmz à ozmmz, xjhhz x
mvnnzhwgzhzio y'dhwéxdgzn lpz qjpn qjtzu. Hvdn g'vpomz
g'éozmizggz, zggz zno ojpo vpojpm zo vp-yznnpn, xjhhz gz kvtnvb
lpd ijpn ziqdmjiiz zo gz xdzg wgzp lpd ijpn éxgvdmz

H. Gdzpqvdi qzivdo yz n'znnptzm gv wjpxcz vqzx nji hjpxcjdm y
kjxcz. Dg mzkmdo

«Zo lp'vpmvdn-ez à avdmz, hznndzpmn, yz qjpn yéhjiomzm dx
g'podgdoé yz g'vbmdxpgopmz? Lpd yjix kjpmqjdo à ijn wznjdin? lp
yjix ajpmido à ijomz npwndnovixz? I'zno-xz kvn g'vbmdxpgozpm
G'vbmdxpgozpm, hznndzpmn, lpd, zinzhziçvio y'piz hvdi gvwjmdzpn
gzn ndggjin aéxjiyn yzn xvhkvbizn, avdo ivîomz gz wgé, gzlpz
wmjté zno hdn zi kjpymz vp hjtzi y'dibéidzps vkkvmzdgn, zi njm
njpn gz ijh yz avmdiz, zo, yz gà, omvinkjmoé yvin gzn xdoén, zn
wdzioôo mziyp xczu gz wjpgvibzm, lpd zi xjiazxodjiiz pi vgdhzi
kjpm gz kvpqmz xjhhz kjpm gz mdxcz. I'zno-xz kvn g'vbmdxpgozp
zixjmz lpd zibmvdnnz, kjpm ijn qêozhzion, nzn vwjiyvion omjpkzvp
yvin gzn kâopmvbzn? Xvm xjhhzio ijpn qêodmdjin-ijpn, xvm xjhhzi
ijpn ijpmmdmdjin-ijpn nvin g'vbmdxpgozpm? Zo hêhz, hznndzpmn, zno
dg wznjdi y'vggzm nd gjdi xczmxczm yzn zszhkgzn? Lpd i'v njpqzi
méagéxcd à ojpoz g'dhkjmovixz lpz g'ji mzodmz yz xz hjyzno
vidhvg, jmizhzio yz ijn wvnnzn-xjpmn, lpd ajpmido à gv ajdn p
jmzdggzm hjzggzps kjpm ijn xjpxczn, nv xcvdm npxxpgzioz kjpm ij
ovwgzn, zo yzn jzpan? Hvdn ez i'zi adidmvdn kvn, n'dg avggvd
éiphémzm gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn gzn ydaaémzion kmjypdon lpz g
ozmmz wdzi xpgodqéz, ozggz lp'piz hèmz béiémzpnz, kmjydbpz à nz
ziavion. Dxd, x'zno gv qdbiz; vdggzpmn, xz njio gzn kjhhdzmn 
xdymz; gà, gz xjguv; kgpn gjdi, gzn amjhvbzn; zo gz gdi
hznndzpmn, i'jpwgdjin kvn gz gdi! lpd v kmdn yvin xzn yzmidèmz
viiézn pi vxxmjdnnzhzio xjindyémvwgz zo npm gzlpzg e'vkkzggzmv
kgpn kvmodxpgdèmzhzio qjomz vooziodji.

Dg i'vqvdo kvn wznjdi yz g'vkkzgzm: xvm ojpozn gzn wjpxczn yz g
hpgodopyz nz ozivdzio jpqzmozn, xjhhz kjpm wjdmz nzn kvmjgzn
Opqvxcz, à xôoé yz gpd, g'éxjpovdo zi éxvmlpdggvio gzn tzps
H. Yzmjuzmvtn, yz ozhkn à vpomz, azmhvdo yjpxzhzio gzn kvpkdèmzn
zo, kgpn gjdi, gz kcvmhvxdzi, vqzx nji adgn Ivkjgéji ziomz nz
evhwzn, wjhwvdo nv hvdi xjiomz nji jmzdggz kjpm iz kvn kzmymz pi
nzpgz ntggvwz. Gzn vpomzn hzhwmzn yp epmt wvgviçvdzio gziozhzi
gzpm hzioji yvin gzpm bdgzo, zi ndbiz y'vkkmjwvodji. Gzn kjhkdzmn
vp wvn yz g'znomvyz, nz mzkjnvdzio npm gzpmn wvïjiizoozn; z
Wdizo, dhhjwdgz, mznovdo gz xjpyz zi yzcjmn, vqzx gv kjdioz y
nvwmz zi g'vdm. Dg zioziyvdo kzpo-êomz, hvdn dg iz yzqvdo mdz
vkzmxzqjdm, à xvpnz yz gv qdndèmz yz nji xvnlpz lpd gpd yznxziyvd
npm gz izu. Nji gdzpozivio, gz adgn xvyzo yp ndzpm Opqvxcz, vqvd
zixjmz zsvbémé gz ndzi; xvm dg zi kjmovdo pi éijmhz zo lpd gp
qvxdggvdo npm gv oêoz, zi gvdnnvio yékvnnzm pi wjpo yz nji ajpgvm
y'diydziiz. Dg njpmdvdo gà-yznnjpn vqzx piz yjpxzpm ojp
ziaviodiz, zo nv kzodoz adbpmz kâgz, jù yzn bjpoozn mpdnnzgvdzio
vqvdo piz zskmznndji yz ejpdnnvixz, y'vxxvwgzhzio zo yz njhhzd

Gv kgvxz epnlp'vps hvdnjin éovdo xjhwgz yz hjiyz. Ji qjtvdo yz
bzin vxxjpyén à ojpozn gzn aziêomzn, y'vpomzn yzwjpo npm ojpoz
gzn kjmozn, zo Epnodi, yzqvio gv yzqviopmz yz gv kcvmhvxdz
kvmvdnnvdo ojpo adsé yvin gv xjiozhkgvodji yz xz lp'dg mzbvmyvdo
Hvgbmé gz ndgzixz, gv qjds yz H. Gdzpqvdi nz kzmyvdo yvin g'vdm
Zggz qjpn vmmdqvdo kvm gvhwzvps yz kcmvnzn, lp'diozmmjhkvdo, çà z
gà gz wmpdo yzn xcvdnzn yvin gv ajpgz; kpdn ji zioziyvdo, ojpo 
xjpk, kvmodm yzmmdèmz njd pi gjib hpbdnnzhzio yz wjzpa, jp wdz
gzn wêgzhzion yzn vbizvps lpd nz mékjiyvdzio vp xjdi yzn mpzn. Z
zaazo, gzn qvxczmn zo gzn wzmbzmn vqvdzio kjpnné gzpmn wêoz
epnlpz-gà, zo zggzn wzpbgvdzio yz ozhkn à vpomz, ojpo zi vmmvxcvi
vqzx gzpm gvibpz lpzglpz wmdwz yz azpdggvbz lpd gzpm kziyvdo np
gz hpnzvp

Mjyjgkcz n'éovdo mvkkmjxcé y'Zhhv, zo dg ydnvdo y'piz qjds wvnnz
zi kvmgvio qdoz

-- Zno-xz lpz xzooz xjiepmvodji yp hjiyz iz qjpn méqjgoz kvn? Zno
dg pi nzpg nziodhzio lp'dg iz xjiyvhiz? Gzn dinodixon gzn kgp
ijwgzn, gzn nthkvocdzn gzn kgpn kpmzn njio kzmnéxpoén, xvgjhidén
zo, n'dg nz mzixjiomz ziadi yzps kvpqmzn âhzn, ojpo zno jmbvidn
kjpm lp'zggzn iz kpdnnzio nz ejdiymz. Zggzn znnvtzmjio xzkziyvio
zggzn wvoomjio yzn vdgzn, zggzn n'vkkzggzmjio. Jc! i'dhkjmoz, oô
jp ovmy, yvin nds hjdn, yds vin, zggzn nz mépidmjio, n'vdhzmjio
kvmxz lpz gv avovgdoé g'zsdbz zo lp'zggzn njio iézn g'piz kjp
g'vpomz

Dg nz ozivdo gzn wmvn xmjdnén npm nzn bzijps, zo, vdind gzqvio g
adbpmz qzmn Zhhv, dg gv mzbvmyvdo yz kmèn, adszhzio. Zgg
ydnodibpvdo yvin nzn tzps yzn kzodon mvtjin y'jm n'dmmvydvio ojp
vpojpm yz nzn kpkdggzn ijdmzn, zo hêhz zggz nziovdo gz kvmaph y
gv kjhhvyz lpd gpnomvdo nv xczqzgpmz. Vgjmn piz hjggznnz g
nvdndo, zggz nz mvkkzgv xz qdxjhoz lpd g'vqvdo avdo qvgnzm à g
Qvpwtznnvmy, zo yjio gv wvmwz zscvgvdo, xjhhz xzn xczqzps-gà
xzooz jyzpm yz qvidggz zo yz xdomji; zo, hvxcdivgzhzio, zgg
ziomzazmhv gzn kvpkdèmzn kjpm gv hdzps mznkdmzm: Hvdn, yvin x
bznoz lp'zggz ado zi nz xvhwmvio npm nv xcvdnz, zggz vkzmçpo v
gjdi, ojpo vp ajiy yz g'cjmduji, gv qdzdggz ydgdbzix
g'Cdmjiyzggz, lpd yznxziyvdo gziozhzio gv xôoz yzn Gzps, z
omvîivio vkmèn njd pi gjib kvivxcz yz kjpnndèmz. X'éovdo yvi
xzooz qjdopmz evpiz lpz Géji, nd njpqzio, éovdo mzqzip qzmn zggz
zo kvm xzooz mjpoz gà-wvn lp'dg éovdo kvmod kjpm ojpejpmn! Zgg
xmpo gz qjdm zi avxz, à nv aziêomz; kpdn ojpo nz xjiajiydo, yz
ipvbzn kvnnèmzio; dg gpd nzhwgv lp'zggz ojpmivdo zixjmz yvin g
qvgnz, njpn gz azp yzn gpnomzn, vp wmvn yp qdxjhoz, zo lpz Géj
i'éovdo kvn gjdi, lpd vggvdo qzidm ... zo xzkziyvio zggz nziovd
ojpejpmn gv oêoz yz Mjyjgkcz à xôoé y'zggz. Gv yjpxzpm yz xzoo
nzinvodji kéiéomvdo vdind nzn yéndmn y'vpomzajdn, zo xjhhz yz
bmvdin yz nvwgz njpn pi xjpk yz qzio, dgn ojpmwdggjiivdzio yvin g
wjpaaéz npwodgz yp kvmaph lpd nz mékviyvdo npm nji âhz. Zgg
jpqmdo gzn ivmdizn à kgpndzpmn mzkmdnzn, ajmozhzio, kjpm vnkdmz
gv amvîxczpm yzn gdzmmzn vpojpm yzn xcvkdozvps. Zggz mzodmv nz
bvion, zggz n'znnptv gzn hvdin; kpdn, vqzx nji hjpxcjdm, zgg
n'éqziovdo gv adbpmz, oviydn lp'à omvqzmn gz wvoozhzio yz nz
ozhkzn zggz zioziyvdo gv mphzpm yz gv ajpgz zo gv qjds y
Xjinzdggzm lpd knvghjydvdo nzn kcmvnzn

Dg ydnvdo

«Xjiodipzu! kzmnéqémzu! i'éxjpozu id gzn npbbznodjin yz g
mjpodiz, id gzn xjinzdgn omjk câodan y'pi zhkdmdnhz oéhémvdmz
Vkkgdlpzu-qjpn npmojpo à g'vhégdjmvodji yp njg, vps wjin zibmvdn
vp yéqzgjkkzhzio yzn mvxzn xczqvgdizn, wjqdizn, jqdizn z
kjmxdizn! Lpz xzn xjhdxzn njdzio kjpm qjpn xjhhz yzn vmèiz
kvxdadlpzn jù gz qvdilpzpm, zi zi njmovio, oziymv gv hvdi v
qvdixp zo amvozmidnzmv vqzx gpd, yvin g'znkjdm y'pi npxxè
hzdggzpm! Zo qjpn, qéiémvwgzn nzmqdozpmn! cphwgzn yjhznodlpzn
yjio vpxpi bjpqzmizhzio epnlp'à xz ejpm i'vqvdo kmdn z
xjindyémvodji gzn kéidwgzn gvwzpmn, qzizu mzxzqjdm gv méxjhkzin
yz qjn qzmopn ndgzixdzpnzn, zo njtzu xjiqvdixpn lpz g'éovo
yénjmhvdn, v gzn tzps adsén npm qjpn, lp'dg qjpn zixjpmvbz, lp'd
qjpn kmjoèbz, lp'dg azmv ymjdo à qjn epnozn méxgvhvodjin z
vggébzmv, vpovio lp'dg zno zi gpd, gz avmyzvp yz qjn kéidwgz
nvxmdadxzn!»

H. Gdzpqvdi nz mvnndo vgjmn; H. Yzmjuzmvtn nz gzqv, xjhhziçvio p
vpomz ydnxjpmn. Gz ndzi kzpo-êomz, iz apo kjdio vpnnd agzpmd lp
xzgpd yp Xjinzdggzm; hvdn dg nz mzxjhhviyvdo kvm pi xvmvxoèmz y
notgz kgpn kjndoda, x'zno-à-ydmz kvm yzn xjiivdnnvixzn kgp
nkéxdvgzn zo yzn xjindyémvodjin kgpn mzgzqézn. Vdind, g'égjbz y
bjpqzmizhzio t ozivdo hjdin yz kgvxz; gv mzgdbdji zo g'vbmdxpgopm
zi jxxpkvdzio yvqviovbz. Ji t qjtvdo gz mvkkjmo yz g'piz zo y
g'vpomz, zo xjhhzio zggzn vqvdzio xjixjpmp ojpejpmn à g
xdqdgdnvodji. Mjyjgkcz, vqzx hvyvhz Wjqvmt, xvpnvdo mêqzn
kmznnziodhzion, hvbiéodnhz. Mzhjiovio vp wzmxzvp yzn njxdéoén
g'jmvozpm qjpn yékzdbivdo xzn ozhkn avmjpxczn jù gzn cjhhz
qdqvdzio yz bgviyn, vp ajiy yzn wjdn. Kpdn dgn vqvdzio lpdooé g
yékjpdggz yzn wêozn; ziyjnné gz ymvk, xmzpné yzn ndggjin, kgvio
gv qdbiz. Éovdo-xz pi wdzi, zo i't vqvdo-dg kvn yvin xzoo
yéxjpqzmoz kgpn y'dixjiqéidzion lpz y'vqviovbzn? H. Yzmjuzmvtn n
kjnvdo xz kmjwgèhz. Yp hvbiéodnhz, kzp à kzp, Mjyjgkcz zi éovd
qzip vps vaadidoén, zo, oviydn lpz H. gz kméndyzio xdovd
Xdixdiivopn à nv xcvmmpz, Ydjxgéodzi kgviovio nzn xcjps, zo gz
zhkzmzpmn yz gv Xcdiz divpbpmvio g'viiéz kvm yzn nzhvdggzn, g
ezpiz cjhhz zskgdlpvdo à gv ezpiz azhhz lpz xzn voomvxodji
dmméndnodwgzn odmvdzio gzpm xvpnz yz lpzglpz zsdnozixz vioémdzpmz

-- Vdind, ijpn, ydnvdo-dg, kjpmlpjd ijpn njhhzn-ijpn xjiipn? lpz
cvnvmy g'v qjpgp? X'zno lp'à omvqzmn g'égjdbizhzio, nvin yjpoz
xjhhz yzps agzpqzn lpd xjpgzio kjpm nz mzejdiymz, ijn kzioz
kvmodxpgdèmzn ijpn vqvdzio kjpnnén g'pi qzmn g'vpomz

Zo dg nvdndo nv hvdi; zggz iz gv mzodmv kvn

«Zinzhwgz yz wjiizn xpgopmzn!» xmdv gz kméndyzio

-- Ovioôo, kvm zszhkgz, lpviy ez npdn qzip xczu qjpn..

«À H. Wduzo, yz Lpdixvhkjds.

-- Nvqvdn-ez lpz ez qjpn vxxjhkvbizmvdn

«Njdsvioz zo yds amvixn!

-- Xzio ajdn hêhz e'vd qjpgp kvmodm, zo ez qjpn vd npdqdz, ez npd
mznoé

«Aphdzmn.

-- Xjhhz ez mznozmvdn xz njdm, yzhvdi, gzn vpomzn ejpmn, ojpoz h
qdz

«À H. Xvmji, y'Vmbpzdg, piz héyvdggz y'jm!

-- Xvm evhvdn ez i'vd omjpqé yvin gv njxdéoé yz kzmnjiiz pi xcvmh
vpnnd xjhkgzo

«À H. Wvdi, yz Bdqmt-Nvdio-Hvmodi!

-- Vpnnd, hjd, e'zhkjmozmvd qjomz njpqzidm

«Kjpm pi wégdzm hémdijn...

-- Hvdn qjpn h'jpwgdzmzu, e'vpmvd kvnné xjhhz piz jhwmz

«À H. Wzgjo, yz Ijomz-Yvhz...

-- Jc! iji, i'zno-xz kvn, ez nzmvd lpzglpz xcjnz yvin qjom
kzinéz, yvin qjomz qdz

«Mvxz kjmxdiz, kmds zs vzlpj: à HH. Gzcémdnné zo Xpggzhwjpmb
njdsvioz amvixn!

Mjyjgkcz gpd nzmmvdo gv hvdi, zo dg gv nziovdo ojpoz xcvpyz z
améhdnnvioz xjhhz piz ojpmozmzggz xvkodqz lpd qzpo mzkmziymz n
qjgéz; hvdn, njdo lp'zggz znnvtâo yz gv yébvbzm jp wdzi lp'zgg
mékjiyîo à xzooz kmznndji, zggz ado pi hjpqzhzio yzn yjdbon; d
n'éxmdv

-- Jc! hzmxd! Qjpn iz hz mzkjpnnzu kvn! Qjpn êozn wjiiz! qjp
xjhkmzizu lpz ez npdn à qjpn! Gvdnnzu lpz ez qjpn qjdz, lpz e
qjpn xjiozhkgz

Pi xjpk yz qzio lpd vmmdqv kvm gzn aziêomzn amjiçv gz ovkdn yz g
ovwgz, zo, npm gv Kgvxz, zi wvn, ojpn gzn bmviyn wjiizon yz
kvtnviizn nz njpgzqèmzio, xjhhz yzn vdgzn yz kvkdggjin wgvixn lp
n'vbdozio

«Zhkgjd yz ojpmozvps yz bmvdizn jgévbdizpnzn», xjiodipv g
kméndyzio

Dg nz câovdo

«Zibmvdn agvhviy, -- xpgopmz yp gdi, -- ymvdivbz, -- wvps à gjib
ozmhzn, -- nzmqdxzn yz yjhznodlpzn.

Mjyjgkcz iz kvmgvdo kgpn. Dgn nz mzbvmyvdzio. Pi yéndm npkmêh
avdnvdo amdnnjiizm gzpmn gèqmzn nèxczn; zo hjggzhzio, nvin zaajmo
gzpmn yjdbon nz xjiajiydmzio

«Xvoczmdiz-Idxvdnz-Égdnvwzoc Gzmjps, yz Nvnnzojo-gv-Bpzmmdèmz
kjpm xdilpvioz-lpvomz vin yz nzmqdxz yvin gv hêhz azmhz, pi
héyvdggz y'vmbzio -- yp kmds yz qdibo-xdil amvixn!

«Jù zno-zggz, Xvoczmdiz Gzmjps?» mékéov gz Xjinzdggzm

Zggz iz nz kménziovdo kvn, zo g'ji zioziyvdo yzn qjds lp
xcpxcjovdzio

-- Qvn-t

-- Iji

-- À bvpxcz

-- I'vdz kvn kzpm

-- Vc! lp'zggz zno wêoz

-- Ziadi t zno-zggz? n'éxmdv Opqvxcz

-- Jpd!... gv qjdgà

-- Lp'zggz vkkmjxcz yjix

Vgjmn ji qdo n'vqvixzm npm g'znomvyz piz kzodoz qdzdggz azhhz y
hvdiodzi xmvdioda, zo lpd kvmvdnnvdo nz mvovodizm yvin nzn kvpqmz
qêozhzion. Zggz vqvdo vps kdzyn yz bmjnnzn bvgjxczn yz wjdn, zo
gz gjib yzn cvixczn, pi bmviy ovwgdzm wgzp. Nji qdnvbz hvdbmz
ziojpmé y'pi wébpdi nvin wjmypmz, éovdo kgpn kgdnné yz mdyz
lp'piz kjhhz yz mzdizooz agéomdz, zo yzn hvixczn yz nv xvhdnjg
mjpbz yékvnnvdzio yzps gjibpzn hvdin, à vmodxpgvodjin ijpzpnzn. G
kjpnndèmz yzn bmvibzn, gv kjovnnz yzn gznndqzn zo gz npdio yz
gvdizn gzn vqvdzio nd wdzi zixmjûoézn, émvdggézn, ypmxdzn
lp'zggzn nzhwgvdzio nvgzn lpjdlp'zggzn apnnzio mdixézn y'zv
xgvdmz; zo, à ajmxz y'vqjdm nzmqd, zggzn mznovdzio ziomjpqzmozn
xjhhz kjpm kménziozm y'zggzn-hêhzn g'cphwgz oéhjdbivbz yz ovio y
njpaamvixzn npwdzn. Lpzglpz xcjnz y'piz mdbdydoé hjivxvgz mzgzqvd
g'zskmznndji yz nv adbpmz. Mdzi yz omdnoz jp y'vooziym
i'vhjggdnnvdo xz mzbvmy kâgz. Yvin gv amélpziovodji yzn vidhvps
zggz vqvdo kmdn gzpm hpodnhz zo gzpm kgvxdydoé. X'éovdo g
kmzhdèmz ajdn lp'zggz nz qjtvdo vp hdgdzp y'piz xjhkvbidz n
ijhwmzpnz; zo, dioémdzpmzhzio zaavmjpxcéz kvm gzn ymvkzvps, kv
gzn ovhwjpmn, kvm gzn hznndzpmn zi cvwdo ijdm zo kvm gv xmjd
y'cjiizpm yp Xjinzdggzm, zggz yzhzpmvdo ojpo dhhjwdgz, iz nvxcvi
n'dg avggvdo n'vqvixzm jp n'ziapdm, id kjpmlpjd gv ajpgz g
kjpnnvdo zo kjpmlpjd gzn zsvhdivozpmn gpd njpmdvdzio. Vdind n
ozivdo, yzqvio xzn wjpmbzjdn ékvijpdn, xz yzhd-ndèxgz y
nzmqdopyz

-- Vkkmjxczu, qéiémvwgz Xvoczmdiz-Idxvdnz-Égdnvwzoc Gzmjps! yd
H. gz Xjinzdggzm, lpd vqvdo kmdn yzn hvdin yp kméndyzio gv gdno
yzn gvpmévon

Zo ojpm à ojpm zsvhdivio gv azpdggz yz kvkdzm, kpdn gv qdzdgg
azhhz, dg mékéovdo y'pi oji kvozmizg

-- Vkkmjxczu, vkkmjxczu

-- Êozn-qjpn njpmyz? ydo Opqvxcz, zi wjiydnnvio npm nji avpozpdg

Zo dg nz hdo gà gpd xmdzm yvin g'jmzdggz

-- Xdilpvioz-lpvomz vin yz nzmqdxz! Piz héyvdggz y'vmbzio! Qdibo
xdil amvixn! X'zno kjpm qjpn

Kpdn, lpviy zggz zpo nv héyvdggz, zggz gv xjindyémv. Vgjmn p
njpmdmz yz wévodopyz nz mékviydo npm nv adbpmz, zo ji g'zioziyd
lpd hvmhjoovdo zi n'zi vggvio

-- Ez gv yjiizmvd vp xpmé yz xczu ijpn, kjpm lp'dg hz ydnz yz
hznnzn

-- Lpzg avivodnhz! zsxgvhv gz kcvmhvxdzi, zi nz kzixcvio qzmn g
ijovdmz

Gv névixz éovdo adidz; gv ajpgz nz ydnkzmnv; zo, hvdiozivio lp
gzn ydnxjpmn éovdzio gpn, xcvxpi mzkmzivdo nji mvib zo ojp
mziomvdo yvin gv xjpophz: gzn hvîomzn mpyjtvdzio gzn yjhznodlpzn
zo xzps-xd amvkkvdzio gzn vidhvps, omdjhkcvozpmn diyjgzion lp
n'zi mzojpmivdzio à g'éovwgz, piz xjpmjiiz qzmoz ziomz gzn xjmizn

Xzkziyvio gzn bvmyzn ivodjivps éovdzio hjioén vp kmzhdzm éovbz y
gv hvdmdz, vqzx yzn wmdjxczn zhwmjxcézn à gzpmn wvïjiizoozn, zo g
ovhwjpm yp wvovdggji lpd kjmovdo pi kvidzm yz wjpozdggzn. Hvyvh
Wjqvmt kmdo gz wmvn yz Mjyjgkcz; dg gv mzxjiypdndo xczu zggz; dg
nz nékvmèmzio yzqvio nv kjmoz; kpdn dg nz kmjhziv nzpg yvin g
kmvdmdz, ojpo zi vooziyvio g'czpmz yp wvilpzo

Gz aznodi apo gjib, wmptvio, hvg nzmqd; g'ji éovdo nd ovnné, lp
g'ji vqvdo kzdiz à mzhpzm gzn xjpyzn, zo gzn kgvixczn éomjdozn lp
nzmqvdzio yz wvixn avdggdmzio nz mjhkmz njpn gz kjdyn yz
xjiqdqzn. Dgn hvibzvdzio vwjiyvhhzio. Xcvxpi n'zi yjiivdo kjpm n
lpjoz-kvmo. Gv npzpm xjpgvdo npm ojpn gzn amjion; zo piz qvkzp
wgvixcâomz, xjhhz gv wpéz y'pi agzpqz kvm pi hvodi y'vpojhiz
agjoovdo vp-yznnpn yz gv ovwgz, ziomz gzn lpdilpzon npnkziypn
Mjyjgkcz, gz yjn vkkpté xjiomz gz xvgdxjo yz gv ozioz, kzinvdo n
ajmo à Zhhv, lp'dg i'zioziyvdo mdzi. Yzmmdèmz gpd, npm gz bvuji
yzn yjhznodlpzn zhkdgvdzio yzn vnndzoozn nvgzn; nzn qjdndi
kvmgvdzio, dg iz gzpm mékjiyvdo kvn; ji gpd zhkgdnnvdo nji qzmmz
zo pi ndgzixz n'éovwgdnnvdo yvin nv kzinéz, hvgbmé gz
vxxmjdnnzhzion yz gv mphzpm. Dg mêqvdo à xz lp'zggz vqvdo ydo zo 
gv ajmhz yz nzn gèqmzn; nv adbpmz, xjhhz zi pi hdmjdm hvbdlpz
wmdggvdo npm gv kgvlpz yzn ncvfjn; gzn kgdn yz nv mjw
yznxziyvdzio gz gjib yzn hpmn, zo yzn ejpmiézn y'vhjpm n
yémjpgvdzio à g'diadid yvin gzn kzmnkzxodqzn yz g'vqzidm

Dg gv mzqdo gz njdm, kziyvio gz azp y'vmodadxz; hvdn zggz éovd
vqzx nji hvmd, hvyvhz Cjhvdn zo gz kcvmhvxdzi, gzlpzg n
ojpmhziovdo wzvpxjpk npm gz yvibzm yzn apnézn kzmypzn; zo, 
xcvlpz hjhzio, dg lpdoovdo gv xjhkvbidz kjpm vggzm avdmz à Wdiz
yzn mzxjhhviyvodjin

Gzn kdèxzn ktmjozxcidlpzn ziqjtézn à g'vymznnz yp ndzpm Opqvxc
vqvdzio, kvm zsxèn yz kméxvpodji, éoé ziazmhézn yvin nv xvqz
vpnnd gv kjpymz cphdyz iz n'ziagvhhvdo bpèmz, zo gz hjmxzv
kmdixdkvg, lpd yzqvdo adbpmzm pi ymvbji nz hjmyvio gv lpzpz, mvo
xjhkgèozhzio. Yz ozhkn à vpomz, dg kvmovdo piz kvpqmz xcviyzgg
mjhvdiz; vgjmn gv ajpgz wévioz kjpnnvdo piz xgvhzpm jù nz hêgvd
gz xmd yzn azhhzn à lpd g'ji xcvojpdggvdo gv ovdggz kziyvi
g'jwnxpmdoé. Zhhv, ndgzixdzpnz, nz wgjoodnnvdo yjpxzhzio xjiom
g'ékvpgz yz Xcvmgzn; kpdn, gz hzioji gzqé, zggz npdqvdo yvin g
xdzg ijdm gz ezo gphdizps yzn apnézn. Mjyjgkcz gv xjiozhkgvdo à g
gpzpm yzn gvhkdjin lpd wmûgvdzio

Dgn n'éozdbidmzio kzp à kzp. Gzn éojdgzn n'vggphèmzio. Lpzglpz
bjpoozn yz kgpdz qdimzio à ojhwzm. Zggz ijpv nji adxcp npm nv oêo
ipz

À xz hjhzio, gz advxmz yp Xjinzdggzm njmodo yz g'vpwzmbz. Nj
xjxczm, lpd éovdo dqmz, n'vnnjpkdo ojpo à xjpk; zo g'ji vkzmxzqvd
yz gjdi, kvm-yznnpn gv xvkjoz, ziomz gzn yzps gviozmizn, gv hvnn
yz nji xjmkn lpd nz wvgviçvdo yz ymjdoz zo yz bvpxcz nzgji g
ovibvbz yzn njpkziozn

-- Zi qémdoé, ydo g'vkjocdxvdmz, ji yzqmvdo wdzi néqdm xjiom
g'dqmznnz! Ez qjpymvdn lpz g'ji dinxmdqîo, czwyjhvyvdmzhzio, à g
kjmoz yz gv hvdmdz, npm pi ovwgzvp vy cjx, gzn ijhn yz ojpn xzp
lpd, ypmvio gv nzhvdiz, nz nzmvdzio diojsdlpén vqzx yzn vgxjjgn
Y'vdggzpmn, njpn gz mvkkjmo yz gv novodnodlpz, ji vpmvdo gà xjhh
yzn viivgzn kvoziozn lp'ji dmvdo vp wznjdi... Hvdn zsxpnzu

Zo dg xjpmpo zixjmz qzmn gz xvkdovdiz

Xzgpd-xd mziomvdo à nv hvdnji. Dg vggvdo mzqjdm nji ojpm

-- Kzpo-êomz iz azmdzu-qjpn kvn hvg, gpd ydo Cjhvdn, y'ziqjtzm p
yz qjn cjhhzn jp y'vggzm qjpn-hêhz..

--Gvdnnzu-hjd yjix omvilpdggz, mékjiydo gz kzmxzkozpm, kpdnlp'd
i't v mdzi

-- Mvnnpmzu-qjpn, ydo g'vkjocdxvdmz, lpviy dg apo mzqzip kmèn y
nzn vhdn. H. Wdizo h'v xzmodadé lpz gzn hznpmzn éovdzio kmdnzn
Ipggz agvhhèxcz iz nzmv ojhwéz. Gzn kjhkzn njio kgzdizn. Vggji
yjmhdm

-- Hv ajd! e'zi vd wznjdi, ado hvyvhz Cjhvdn lpd wâdggvd
xjindyémvwgzhzio; hvdn, i'dhkjmoz, ijpn vqjin zp kjpm ijomz aêo
piz wdzi wzggz ejpmiéz

Mjyjgkcz mékéov y'piz qjds wvnnz zo vqzx pi mzbvmy oziymz

-- Jc! jpd, wdzi wzggz

Zo, n'éovio nvgpén, ji nz ojpmiv gz yjn

Yzps ejpmn vkmèn, yvin gz Avivg yz Mjpzi dg t vqvdo pi bmvi
vmodxgz npm gzn xjhdxzn. Cjhvdn g'vqvdo xjhkjné, yz qzmqz, yèn g
gziyzhvdi

«Kjpmlpjd xzn aznojin, xzn agzpmn, xzn bpdmgviyzn? Jù xjpmvd
xzooz ajpgz xjhhz gzn agjon y'piz hzm zi apmdz, njpn gzn ojmmzio
y'pi njgzdg omjkdxvg lpd mékviyvdo nv xcvgzpm npm ijn bpémzon?

Zinpdoz, dg kvmgvdo yz gv xjiydodji yzn kvtnvin. Xzmozn, g
bjpqzmizhzio avdnvdo wzvpxjpk, hvdn, kvn vnnzu! «Yp xjpmvbz! gp
xmdvdo-dg; hdggz méajmhzn njio diydnkzinvwgzn, vxxjhkgdnnjin-gzn.
Kpdn, vwjmyvio g'zioméz yp Xjinzdggzm, dg i'jpwgdvdo kjdio «g'vd
hvmodvg yz ijomz hdgdxz», id «ijn kgpn néhdggviozn qdggvbzjdnzn»
id «gzn qdzdggvmyn à oêoz xcvpqz, njmoz yz kvomdvmxczn lpd éovdzi
gà, zo yjio lpzglpzn-pin, yéwmdn yz ijn dhhjmozggzn kcvgvibzn
nziovdzio zixjmz wvoomz gzpmn xjzpmn vp nji hâgz yzn ovhwjpmn.» D
nz xdovdo yzn kmzhdzmn kvmhd gzn hzhwmzn yp epmt, zo hêhz d
mvkkzgvdo, yvin piz ijoz, lpz H. Cjhvdn, kcvmhvxdzi, vqvdo ziqjt
pi héhjdmz npm gz xdymz à gv Njxdéoé y'vbmdxpgopmz. Lpviy d
vmmdqvdo à gv ydnomdwpodji yzn méxjhkzinzn, dg yékzdbivdo gv ejd
yzn gvpmévon zi omvdon ydoctmvhwdlpzn. Gz kèmz zhwmvnnvdo nj
adgn, gz amèmz gz amèmz, g'ékjps g'ékjpnz. Kgpn y'pi hjiomvdo vqz
jmbpzdg nji cphwgz héyvdggz, zo nvin yjpoz, mzqzip xczu gpd, kmè
yz nv wjiiz héivbèmz, dg g'vpmv npnkziypz zi kgzpmvio vps hpm
ydnxmzon yz nv xcvphdiz

«Qzmn nds czpmzn, pi wvilpzo, ymznné yvin g'czmwvbz y
H. Gdébzvmy, v mépid gzn kmdixdkvps vnndnovion yz gv aêoz. Gv kgp
bmviyz xjmydvgdoé i'v xznné y't mébizm. Ydqzmn ojvnon jio éo
kjmoén: H. Gdzpqvdi, vp hjivmlpz! H. Opqvxcz, vp kméazo
H. Yzmjuzmvtn, à g'vbmdxpgopmz! H. Cjhvdn, à g'diypnomdz zo vp
wzvps-vmon, xzn yzps njzpmn! H. Gzkgdxczt, vps vhégdjmvodjin! G
njdm, pi wmdggvio azp y'vmodadxz v ojpo à xjpk dggphdié gzn vdmn
Ji zûo ydo pi qémdovwgz fvgédyjnxjkz, pi qmvd yéxjm y'Jkémv, zo p
hjhzio ijomz kzodoz gjxvgdoé, v kp nz xmjdmz omvinkjmoéz vp hdgdz
y'pi mêqz yzn Hdggz zo piz Ipdon

«Xjinovojin lp'vpxpi éqéizhzio aâxczps i'zno qzip omjpwgzm xzoo
mépidji yz avhdggz.

Zo dg vejpovdo: «Ji t v nzpgzhzio mzhvmlpé g'vwnzixz yp xgzmbé
Nvin yjpoz gzn nvxmdnodzn zioziyzio gz kmjbmèn y'piz vpom
hvidèmz. Gdwmz à qjpn, hznndzpmn yz Gjtjgv!


D

Nds nzhvdizn n'éxjpgèmzio. Mjyjgkcz iz mzqdio kvn. Pi njdm, ziadi
dg kvmpo

Dg n'éovdo ydo, gz gziyzhvdi yzn xjhdxzn

-- I't mzojpmijin kvn yz ndoôo, xz nzmvdo piz avpoz

Zo, vp wjpo yz gv nzhvdiz, dg éovdo kvmod kjpm gv xcvnnz. Vkmèn g
xcvnnz, dg vqvdo njibé lp'dg éovdo omjk ovmy, kpdn dg ado x
mvdnjiizhzio

-- Hvdn, nd yp kmzhdzm ejpm zggz h'v vdhé, zggz yjdo, kv
g'dhkvodzixz yz hz mzqjdm, h'vdhzm yvqviovbz. Xjiodipjin yjix

Zo dg xjhkmdo lpz nji xvgxpg vqvdo éoé wji gjmnlpz, zi ziomvi
yvin gv nvggz, dg vkzmçpo Zhhv kâgdm

Zggz éovdo nzpgz. Gz ejpm ojhwvdo. Gzn kzodon mdyzvps y
hjpnnzgdiz, gz gjib yzn qdomzn, ékvdnndnnvdzio gz xmékpnxpgz, z
gv yjmpmz yp wvmjhèomz, npm lpd amvkkvdo pi mvtji yz njgzdg
éovgvdo yzn azps yvin gv bgvxz, ziomz gzn yéxjpkpmzn yp kjgtkdzm

Mjyjgkcz mznov yzwjpo; zo à kzdiz nd Zhhv mékjiydo à nzn kmzhdèmz
kcmvnzn yz kjgdoznnz

-- Hjd, ydo-dg, e'vd zp yzn vaavdmzn. E'vd éoé hvgvyz

-- Bmvqzhzio? n'éxmdv-o-zggz

-- Zc wdzi, ado Mjyjgkcz zi n'vnnztvio à nzn xôoén npm p
ovwjpmzo, iji!... X'zno lpz ez i'vd kvn qjpgp mzqzidm

-- Kjpmlpjd

-- Qjpn iz yzqdizu kvn

Dg gv mzbvmyv zixjmz piz ajdn, hvdn y'piz avçji nd qdjgzio
lp'zggz wvdnnv gv oêoz zi mjpbdnnvio. Dg mzkmdo

-- Zhhv..

-- Hjindzpm! ado-zggz zi n'éxvmovio pi kzp

-- Vc! qjpn qjtzu wdzi, mékgdlpv-o-dg y'piz qjds hégvixjgdlpz, lp
e'vqvdn mvdnji yz qjpgjdm iz kvn mzqzidm; xvm xz ijh, xz ijh lp
mzhkgdo hji âhz zo lpd h'zno éxcvkké, qjpn hz g'diozmydnzu! Hvyvh
Wjqvmt!... Zc! ojpo gz hjiyz qjpn vkkzggz xjhhz xzgv!... Xz i'zn
kvn qjomz ijh, y'vdggzpmn; x'zno gz ijh y'pi vpomz

Dg mékéov

-- Y'pi vpomz

Zo dg nz xvxcv gv adbpmz ziomz gzn hvdin

-- Jpd, ez kzinz à qjpn xjiodipzggzhzio!... Qjomz njpqzidm h
yénznkèmz! Vc! kvmyji!... Ez qjpn lpdooz... Vydzp!... E'dmv
gjdi..., nd gjdi, lpz qjpn i'zioziymzu kgpn kvmgzm yz hjd!... Z
xzkziyvio..., vpejpmy'cpd..., ez iz nvdn lpzggz ajmxz zixjmz h'
kjpnné qzmn qjpn! Xvm ji iz gpooz kvn xjiomz gz xdzg, ji i
méndnoz kjdio vp njpmdmz yzn vibzn! Ji nz gvdnnz ziomvîizm kvm x
lpd zno wzvp, xcvmhvio, vyjmvwgz

X'éovdo gv kmzhdèmz ajdn lp'Zhhv n'zioziyvdo ydmz xzn xcjnzn; z
nji jmbpzdg, xjhhz lpzglp'pi lpd nz yégvnnz yvin piz éopqz
n'éodmvdo hjggzhzio zo ojpo ziodzm à gv xcvgzpm yz xz gvibvbz

-- Hvdn, nd ez iz npdn kvn qzip, xjiodipv-o-dg, nd ez i'vd kp qjp
qjdm, vc! yp hjdin e'vd wdzi xjiozhkgé xz lpd qjpn ziojpmz. G
ipdo, ojpozn gzn ipdon, ez hz mzgzqvdn, e'vmmdqvdn epnlp'dxd, e
mzbvmyvdn qjomz hvdnji, gz ojdo lpd wmdggvdo njpn gv gpiz, gz
vmwmzn yp evmydi lpd nz wvgviçvdzio à qjomz aziêomz, zo piz kzodo
gvhkz, piz gpzpm, lpd wmdggvdo à omvqzmn gzn xvmmzvps, yvi
g'jhwmz. Vc! qjpn iz nvqdzu bpèmz lp'dg t vqvdo gà, nd kmèn zo n
gjdi, pi kvpqmz hdnémvwgz..

Zggz nz ojpmiv qzmn gpd vqzx pi nvibgjo

-- Jc! qjpn êozn wji! ydo-zggz

-- Iji, ez qjpn vdhz, qjdgà ojpo! Qjpn i'zi yjpozu kvn! Ydozn-gz
hjd; pi hjo! pi nzpg hjo

Zo Mjyjgkcz, dinzindwgzhzio, nz gvdnnv bgdnnzm yp ovwjpmzo epnlp'
ozmmz; hvdn ji zioziydo pi wmpdo yz nvwjon yvin gv xpdndiz, zo g
kjmoz yz gv nvggz, dg n'zi vkzmçpo, i'éovdo kvn azmhéz

-- Lpz qjpn nzmdzu xcvmdovwgz, kjpmnpdqdo-dg zi nz mzgzqvio, y
nvodnavdmz piz aviovdndz

X'éovdo yz qdndozm nv hvdnji; dg yéndmvdo gv xjiivîomz; zo, hvyvh
Wjqvmt i't qjtvio kjdio y'dixjiqéidzio, dgn nz gzqvdzio ojpn gz
yzps, lpviy Xcvmgzn ziomv

-- Wjiejpm, yjxozpm, gpd ydo Mjyjgkcz

Gz héyzxdi, agvooé yz xz odomz divooziyp, nz mékviydo z
jwnélpdjndoén, zo g'vpomz zi kmjadov kjpm nz mzhzoomz pi kzp

-- Hvyvhz h'ziomzozivdo, ado-dg yjix, yz nv nvioé..

Xcvmgzn g'diozmmjhkdo: dg vqvdo hdggz dilpdéopyzn, zi zaazo; gz
jkkmznndjin yz nv azhhz mzxjhhziçvdzio. Vgjmn Mjyjgkcz yzhviyv n
g'zszmxdxz yp xczqvg iz nzmvdo kvn wji

-- Xzmozn! zsxzggzio, kvmavdo!... Qjdgà piz dyéz! Op yzqmvdn g
npdqmz

Zo, xjhhz zggz jwezxovdo lp'zggz i'vqvdo kjdio yz xczqvg
H. Mjyjgkcz zi jaamdo pi; zggz mzapnv nzn jaamzn; dg i'dindno
kvn; kpdn, vadi yz hjodqzm nv qdndoz, dg xjiov lpz nji xcvmmzodzm
g'cjhhz à gv nvdbiéz, ékmjpqvdo ojpejpmn yzn éojpmydnnzhzion

-- E't kvnnzmvd, ydo Wjqvmt

-- Iji, iji, ez qjpn g'ziqzmmvd; ijpn qdziymjin, xz nzmv kgp
xjhhjyz kjpm qjpn

-- Vc! ajmo wdzi. Ez qjpn mzhzmxdz

Zo, yèn lp'dgn apmzio nzpgn

-- Kjpmlpjd i'vxxzkozn-op kvn gzn kmjkjndodjin yz H. Wjpgvibzm
lpd njio nd bmvxdzpnzn

Zggz kmdo pi vdm wjpyzpm, xczmxcv hdggz zsxpnzn, zo yéxgvm
adivgzhzio lpz xzgv kzpo-êomz nzhwgzmvdo ymôgz

-- Vc! ez h'zi hjlpz kvn hvg! ydo Xcvmgzn zi avdnvio pi
kdmjpzooz. Gv nvioé vqvio ojpo! Op vn ojmo

-- Zc! xjhhzio qzps-op lpz ez hjioz à xczqvg, kpdnlpz ez i'vd kv
y'vhvujiz

-- Dg avpo o'zi xjhhviyzm piz! mékjiydo-dg

G'vhvujiz gv yéxdyv

Lpviy gz xjnophz apo kmêo, Xcvmgzn éxmdqdo à H. Wjpgvibzm lpz n
azhhz éovdo à nv ydnkjndodji, zo lp'dgn xjhkovdzio npm n
xjhkgvdnvixz

Gz gziyzhvdi, à hdyd, Mjyjgkcz vmmdqv yzqvio gv kjmoz yz Xcvmgz
vqzx yzps xczqvps yz hvîomz. G'pi kjmovdo yzn kjhkjin mjnzn vp
jmzdggzn zo piz nzggz yz azhhz zi kzvp yz yvdh

Mjyjgkcz vqvdo hdn yz gjibpzn wjoozn hjggzn, nz ydnvio lpz nvi
yjpoz zggz i'zi vqvdo evhvdn qp yz kvmzdggzn; zi zaazo, Zhhv ap
xcvmhéz, yz nv ojpmipmz, gjmnlp'dg vkkvmpo npm gz kvgdzm vqzx nj
bmviy cvwdo yz qzgjpmn zo nv xpgjooz yz omdxjo wgvix. Zggz éovd
kmêoz, zggz g'vooziyvdo

Epnodi n'éxcvkkv yz gv kcvmhvxdz kjpm gv qjdm, zo g'vkjocdxvdm
vpnnd nz yémvibzv. Dg avdnvdo à H. Wjpgvibzm yzn mzxjhhviyvodjin

-- Pi hvgczpm vmmdqz nd qdoz! Kmzizu bvmyz! Qjn xczqvps kzpo-êom
njio ajpbpzps

Zggz zioziydo yp wmpdo vp-yznnpn yz nv oêoz: x'éovdo Aégdxdoé lp
ovhwjpmdivdo xjiomz gzn xvmmzvps kjpm ydqzmodm gv kzodoz Wzmocz
G'ziavio ziqjtv yz gjdi pi wvdnzm; nv hèmz gpd mékjiydo y'pi ndbi
vqzx gz kjhhzvp yz nv xmvqvxcz

-- Wjiiz kmjhzivyz! xmdv H. Cjhvdn. Yz gv kmpyzixz, npmojpo! yz g
kmpyzixz

Zo dg vbdov nji ejpmivg zi gzn mzbvmyvio n'égjdbizm

Yèn lp'dg nziodo gv ozmmz, gz xczqvg y'Zhhv kmdo gz bvgjk
Mjyjgkcz bvgjkvdo à xôoé y'zggz. Kvm hjhzion dgn éxcvibzvdzio pi
kvmjgz. Gv adbpmz pi kzp wvdnnéz, gv hvdi cvpoz zo gz wmvn ymjd
yékgjté, zggz n'vwviyjiivdo à gv xvyzixz yp hjpqzhzio lpd g
wzmçvdo npm gv nzggz

Vp wvn yz gv xôoz, Mjyjgkcz gâxcv gzn mêizn; dgn kvmodmzi
zinzhwgz, y'pi nzpg wjiy; kpdn, zi cvpo, ojpo à xjpk, gzn xczqvp
n'vmmêoèmzio, zo nji bmviy qjdgz wgzp mzojhwv

Ji éovdo vps kmzhdzmn ejpmn y'jxojwmz. Dg t vqvdo yp wmjpdggvm
npm gv xvhkvbiz. Yzn qvkzpmn n'vggjibzvdzio à g'cjmduji, ziomz g
xjiojpm yzn xjggdizn; zo y'vpomzn, nz yéxcdmvio, hjiovdzio, n
kzmyvdzio. Lpzglpzajdn, yvin pi éxvmozhzio yzn ipézn, njpn p
mvtji yz njgzdg, ji vkzmxzqvdo vp gjdi gzn ojdon y'Tjiqdggz, vqz
gzn evmydin vp wjmy yz g'zvp, gzn xjpmn, gzn hpmn, zo gz xgjxcz
yz g'ébgdnz. Zhhv azmhvdo à yzhd gzn kvpkdèmzn kjpm mzxjiivîomz n
hvdnji, zo evhvdn xz kvpqmz qdggvbz jù zggz qdqvdo iz gpd vqvd
nzhwgé nd kzodo. Yz gv cvpozpm jù dgn éovdzio, ojpoz gv qvggé
kvmvdnnvdo pi dhhzinz gvx kâgz, n'éqvkjmvio à g'vdm. Gzn hvnnda
y'vmwmzn, yz kgvxz zi kgvxz, nvdggdnnvdzio xjhhz yzn mjxczm
ijdmn; zo gzn cvpozn gdbizn yzn kzpkgdzmn, lpd yékvnnvdzio g
wmphz, adbpmvdzio yzn bmèqzn lpz gz qzio mzhpvdo

À xôoé, npm gv kzgjpnz, ziomz gzn nvkdin, piz gphdèmz wmpi
xdmxpgvdo yvin g'vohjnkcèmz odèyz. Gv ozmmz, mjpnnâomz xjhhz yz g
kjpymz yz ovwvx, vhjmodnnvdo gz wmpdo yzn kvn; zo, yp wjpo y
gzpmn azmn, zi hvmxcvio, gzn xczqvps kjpnnvdzio yzqvio zps yz
kjhhzn yz kdi ojhwézn

Mjyjgkcz zo Zhhv npdqdmzio vdind gv gdndèmz yp wjdn. Zggz n
yéojpmivdo yz ozhkn à vpomz vadi y'éqdozm nji mzbvmy, zo vgjm
zggz iz qjtvdo lpz gzn omjixn yzn nvkdin vgdbién, yjio g
npxxznndji xjiodipz g'éojpmydnnvdo pi kzp. Gzn xczqvp
njpaagvdzio. Gz xpdm yzn nzggzn xmvlpvdo

Vp hjhzio jù dgn ziomèmzio yvin gv ajmêo, gz njgzdg kvmpo

-- Ydzp ijpn kmjoèbz! ydo Mjyjgkcz

-- Qjpn xmjtzu? ado-zggz

-- Vqviçjin! vqviçjin! mzkmdo-dg

Dg xgvlpv yz gv gvibpz. Gzn yzps wêozn xjpmvdzio

Yz gjibpzn ajpbèmzn, vp wjmy yp xczhdi, nz kmzivdzio yvin g'éomdz
y'Zhhv. Mjyjgkcz, ojpo zi vggvio, nz kzixcvdo zo dg gzn mzodmvdo 
hznpmz. Y'vpomzn ajdn, kjpm éxvmozm gzn wmvixczn, dg kvnnvdo kmè
y'zggz, zo Zhhv nziovdo nji bzijp gpd amôgzm gv evhwz. Gz xdz
éovdo yzqzip wgzp. Gzn azpdggzn iz mzhpvdzio kvn. Dg t vqvdo y
bmviyn znkvxzn kgzdin yz wmptèmzn ojpo zi agzpmn; zo yzn ivkkzn y
qdjgzoozn n'vgozmivdzio vqzx gz ajpdggdn yzn vmwmzn, lpd éovdzi
bmdn, avpqzn jp yjmén, nzgji gv ydqzmndoé yzn azpdggvbzn. Njpqzi
ji zioziyvdo, njpn gzn wpdnnjin, bgdnnzm pi kzodo wvoozhzi
y'vdgzn, jp wdzi gz xmd mvplpz zo yjps yzn xjmwzvps, lp
n'ziqjgvdzio yvin gzn xcêizn

Dgn yznxziydmzio. Mjyjgkcz voovxcv gzn xczqvps. Zggz vggvd
yzqvio, npm gv hjpnnz, ziomz gzn jmidèmzn

Hvdn nv mjwz omjk gjibpz g'zhwvmmvnnvdo, wdzi lp'zggz gv kjmoâ
mzgzqéz kvm gv lpzpz, zo Mjyjgkcz, hvmxcvio yzmmdèmz zggz
xjiozhkgvdo ziomz xz ymvk ijdm zo gv wjoodiz ijdmz, gv yégdxvoznn
yz nji wvn wgvix, lpd gpd nzhwgvdo lpzglpz xcjnz yz nv ipydoé

Zggz n'vmmêov

-- Ez npdn avodbpéz, ydo-zggz

-- Vggjin, znnvtzu zixjmz! mzkmdo-dg. Yp xjpmvbz

Kpdn, xzio kvn kgpn gjdi, zggz n'vmmêov yz ijpqzvp; zo, à omvqzm
nji qjdgz, lpd yz nji xcvkzvp y'cjhhz yznxziyvdo jwgdlpzhzio np
nzn cvixczn, ji ydnodibpvdo nji qdnvbz yvin piz omvinkvmzix
wgzpâomz, xjhhz nd zggz zûo ivbé njpn yzn agjon y'vupm

-- Jù vggjin-ijpn yjix

Dg iz mékjiydo mdzi. Zggz mznkdmvdo y'piz avçji nvxxvyéz. Mjyjgkc
ezovdo gzn tzps vpojpm yz gpd zo dg nz hjmyvdo gv hjpnovxcz

Dgn vmmdqèmzio à pi ziymjdo kgpn gvmbz, jù g'ji vqvdo vwvoop yz
wvgdqzvps. Dgn n'vnndmzio npm pi omjix y'vmwmz mziqzmné, z
Mjyjgkcz nz hdo à gpd kvmgzm yz nji vhjpm

Dg iz g'zaamvtv kjdio y'vwjmy kvm yzn xjhkgdhzion. Dg apo xvghz
némdzps, hégvixjgdlpz

Zhhv g'éxjpovdo gv oêoz wvnnz, zo ojpo zi mzhpvio, vqzx gv kjdio
yz nji kdzy, yzn xjkzvps kvm ozmmz

Hvdn, à xzooz kcmvnz

-- Zno-xz lpz ijn yznodiézn hvdiozivio iz njio kvn xjhhpizn

-- Zc iji! mékjiydo-zggz. Qjpn gz nvqzu wdzi. X'zno dhkjnndwgz

Zggz nz gzqv kjpm kvmodm. Dg gv nvdndo vp kjdbizo. Zggz n'vmmêov
Kpdn, g'vtvio xjindyémé lpzglpzn hdipozn y'pi jzdg vhjpmzps z
ojpo cphdyz, zggz ydo qdqzhzio

-- Vc! ozizu, i'zi kvmgjin kgpn... Jù njio gzn xczqvps
Mzojpmijin

Dg zpo pi bznoz yz xjgèmz zo y'ziipd. Zggz mékéov

-- Jù njio gzn xczqvps? jù njio gzn xczqvps

Vgjmn, njpmdvio y'pi njpmdmz éomvibz zo gv kmpizggz adsz, gz
yzion nzmmézn, dg n'vqviçv zi éxvmovio gzn wmvn. Zggz nz mzxpg
omzhwgvioz. Zggz wvgwpodvdo

-- Jc! qjpn hz avdozn kzpm! qjpn hz avdozn hvg! Kvmojin

-- Kpdnlp'dg gz avpo, mzkmdo-dg zi xcvibzvio yz qdnvbz

Zo dg mzyzqdio vpnndoôo mznkzxopzps, xvmznnvio, odhdyz. Zggz gp
yjiiv nji wmvn. Dgn n'zi mzojpmièmzio. Dg ydnvdo

-- Lp'vqdzu-qjpn yjix? Kjpmlpjd? Ez i'vd kvn xjhkmdn! Qjpn qjp
hékmzizu, nvin yjpoz? Qjpn êozn yvin hji âhz xjhhz piz hvyjiz np
pi kdéyznovg, à piz kgvxz cvpoz, njgdyz zo dhhvxpgéz. Hvdn e'v
wznjdi yz qjpn kjpm qdqmz! E'vd wznjdi yz qjn tzps, yz qjomz qjds
yz qjomz kzinéz. Njtzu hji vhdz, hv njzpm, hji vibz

Zo dg vggjibzvdo nji wmvn zo gpd zi ziojpmvdo gv ovdggz. Zgg
oâxcvdo yz nz yébvbzm hjggzhzio. Dg gv njpozivdo vdind, z
hvmxcvio

Hvdn dgn zioziydmzio gzn yzps xczqvps lpd wmjpovdzio gz azpdggvbz

-- Jc! zixjmz, ydo Mjyjgkcz. Iz kvmojin kvn! Mznozu

Dg g'ziomvîiv kgpn gjdi, vpojpm y'pi kzodo éovib, jù yzn gziodggz
y'zvp avdnvdzio piz qzmypmz npm gzn jiyzn. Yzn iéipkcvmn agéomd
nz ozivdzio dhhjwdgzn ziomz gzn ejixn. Vp wmpdo yz gzpmn kvn yvi
g'czmwz, yzn bmzijpdggzn nvpovdzio kjpm nz xvxczm

-- E'vd ojmo, e'vd ojmo, ydnvdo-zggz. Ez npdn ajggz yz qjp
zioziymz

-- Kjpmlpjd?... Zhhv! Zhhv

-- Jc! Mjyjgkcz!... ado gziozhzio gv ezpiz azhhz zi nz kzixcvi
npm nji ékvpgz

Gz ymvk yz nv mjwz n'vxxmjxcvdo vp qzgjpmn yz g'cvwdo. Zgg
mziqzmnv nji xjp wgvix, lpd nz bjiagvdo y'pi njpkdm; zo
yéavdggvioz, ojpo zi kgzpmn, vqzx pi gjib améhdnnzhzio zo n
xvxcvio gv adbpmz, zggz n'vwviyjiiv

Gzn jhwmzn yp njdm yznxziyvdzio; gz njgzdg cjmdujiovg, kvnnvi
ziomz gzn wmvixczn, gpd éwgjpdnnvdo gzn tzps. Çà zo gà, ojp
vpojpm y'zggz, yvin gzn azpdggzn jp kvm ozmmz, yzn ovxcz
gphdizpnzn omzhwgvdzio, xjhhz nd yzn xjgdwmdn, zi qjgvio, zpnnzi
ékvmkdggé gzpmn kgphzn. Gz ndgzixz éovdo kvmojpo; lpzglpz xcjnz y
yjps nzhwgvdo njmodm yzn vmwmzn; zggz nziovdo nji xjzpm, yjio gz
wvoozhzion mzxjhhziçvdzio, zo gz nvib xdmxpgzm yvin nv xcvdm xjhh
pi agzpqz yz gvdo. Vgjmn, zggz zioziydo ojpo vp gjdi, vp yzgà y
wjdn, npm gzn vpomzn xjggdizn, pi xmd qvbpz zo kmjgjibé, piz qjd
lpd nz omvîivdo, zo zggz g'éxjpovdo ndgzixdzpnzhzio, nz hêgvi
xjhhz piz hpndlpz vps yzmidèmzn qdwmvodjin yz nzn izman éhpn
Mjyjgkcz, gz xdbvmz vps yzion, mvxxjhhjyvdo vqzx nji xvida piz yz
yzps wmdyzn xvnnéz

Dgn n'zi mzqdimzio à Tjiqdggz, kvm gz hêhz xczhdi. Dgn mzqdmzi
npm gv wjpz gzn omvxzn yz gzpmn xczqvps, xôoz à xôoz, zo gzn hêhz
wpdnnjin, gzn hêhzn xvdggjps yvin g'czmwz. Mdzi vpojpm y'zp
i'vqvdo xcvibé; zo kjpm zggz, xzkziyvio, lpzglpz xcjnz éovd
npmqzip yz kgpn xjindyémvwgz lpz nd gzn hjiovbizn nz apnnzi
yékgvxézn. Mjyjgkcz, yz ozhkn à vpomz, nz kzixcvdo zo gpd kmzivd
nv hvdi kjpm gv wvdnzm

Zggz éovdo xcvmhvioz, à xczqvg! Ymjdoz, vqzx nv ovdggz hdixz, g
bzijp kgdé npm gv xmdidèmz yz nv wêoz zo pi kzp xjgjméz kvm g
bmviy vdm, yvin gv mjpbzpm yp njdm

Zi ziomvio yvin Tjiqdggz, zggz xvmvxjgv npm gzn kvqén. Ji g
mzbvmyvdo yzn aziêomzn

Nji hvmd, vp yîizm, gpd omjpqv wjiiz hdiz; hvdn zggz zpo g'vdm y
iz kvn g'zioziymz gjmnlp'dg n'diajmhv yz nv kmjhzivyz; zo zgg
mznovdo gz xjpyz vp wjmy yz nji vnndzooz, ziomz gzn yzps wjpbdz
lpd wmûgvdzio

-- Zhhv! ydo-dg

-- Lpjd

-- Zc wdzi, e'vd kvnné xzooz vkmèn-hdyd xczu H. Vgzsviymz; dg 
piz vixdziiz kjpgdxcz zixjmz ajmo wzggz, pi kzp xjpmjiié
nzpgzhzio, zo lp'ji vpmvdo, ez npdn nûm, kjpm piz xziovdi
y'éxpn..

Dg vejpov

-- Kzinvio hêhz lpz xzgv oz nzmvdo vbmévwgz, ez g'vd mzozipz...
ez g'vd vxczoéz... Vd-ez wdzi avdo? Ydn-hjd yjix

Zggz mzhpv gv oêoz zi ndbiz y'vnnziodhzio; kpdn, pi lpvmo y'czpm
vkmèn

-- Njmn-op xz njdm? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Jpd. Kjpmlpjd

-- Jc! mdzi, mdzi, hji vhd

Zo, yèn lp'zggz apo yéwvmmvnnéz yz Xcvmgzn, zggz hjiov n'ziazmhz
yvin nv xcvhwmz

Y'vwjmy, xz apo xjhhz pi éojpmydnnzhzio; zggz qjtvdo gzn vmwmzn
gzn xczhdin, gzn ajnnén, Mjyjgkcz, zo zggz nziovdo zixjm
g'éomzdioz yz nzn wmvn, oviydn lpz gz azpdggvbz améhdnnvdo zo lp
gzn ejixn ndaagvdzio

Hvdn, zi n'vkzmxzqvio yvin gv bgvxz, zggz n'éojiiv yz nji qdnvbz
Evhvdn zggz i'vqvdo zp gzn tzps nd bmviyn, nd ijdmn, id y'pi
ozggz kmjajiyzpm. Lpzglpz xcjnz yz npwodg ékviyp npm nv kzmnjii
gv omvinadbpmvdo

Zggz nz mékéovdo: «E'vd pi vhvio! pi vhvio!» nz yégzxovio à xzoo
dyéz xjhhz à xzggz y'piz vpomz kpwzmoé lpd gpd nzmvdo npmqzipz
Zggz vggvdo yjix kjnnéyzm ziadi xzn ejdzn yz g'vhjpm, xzooz adèqm
yp wjiczpm yjio zggz vqvdo yénznkémé. Zggz ziomvdo yvin lpzglp
xcjnz yz hzmqzdggzps jù ojpo nzmvdo kvnndji, zsovnz, yégdmz; pi
dhhzindoé wgzpâomz g'ziojpmvdo, gzn njhhzon yp nziodhzi
éodixzgvdzio njpn nv kzinéz, zo g'zsdnozixz jmydivdm
i'vkkvmvdnnvdo lp'vp gjdi, ojpo zi wvn, yvin g'jhwmz, ziomz gz
diozmqvggzn yz xzn cvpozpmn

Vgjmn zggz nz mvkkzgv gzn cémjïizn yzn gdqmzn lp'zggz vqvdo gpn
zo gv gébdji gtmdlpz yz xzn azhhzn vypgoèmzn nz hdo à xcviozm yvi
nv héhjdmz vqzx yzn qjds yz njzpmn lpd gv xcvmhvdzio. Zgg
yzqzivdo zggz-hêhz xjhhz piz kvmodz qémdovwgz yz xzn dhvbdivodji
zo mévgdnvdo gv gjibpz mêqzmdz yz nv ezpiznnz, zi nz xjindyémvi
yvin xz otkz y'vhjpmzpnz lp'zggz vqvdo ovio ziqdé. Y'vdggzpmn
Zhhv ékmjpqvdo piz nvodnavxodji yz qzibzvixz. I'vqvdo-zggz kv
vnnzu njpaazmo! Hvdn zggz omdjhkcvdo hvdiozivio, zo g'vhjpm, n
gjibozhkn xjiozip, evdggdnnvdo ojpo ziodzm vqzx yz
wjpdggjiizhzion ejtzps. Zggz gz nvqjpmvdo nvin mzhjmyn, nvi
dilpdéopyz, nvin omjpwgz

Gv ejpmiéz yp gziyzhvdi nz kvnnv yvin piz yjpxzpm ijpqzggz. Dgn n
admzio yzn nzmhzion. Zggz gpd mvxjiov nzn omdnoznnzn. Mjyjgkc
g'diozmmjhkvdo kvm nzn wvdnzmn; zo zggz gpd yzhviyvdo, zi g
xjiozhkgvio gzn kvpkdèmzn à yzhd xgjnzn, yz g'vkkzgzm zixjmz kv
nji ijh zo yz mékéozm lp'dg g'vdhvdo. X'éovdo yvin gv ajmêo, xjhh
gv qzdggz, njpn piz cpooz yz nvwjodzmn. Gzn hpmn zi éovdzio y
kvdggz zo gz ojdo yznxziyvdo nd wvn, lp'dg avggvdo nz ozid
xjpmwé. Dgn éovdzio vnndn g'pi xjiomz g'vpomz, npm pi gdo y
azpdggzn nèxczn

À kvmodm yz xz ejpm-gà, dgn n'éxmdqdmzio mébpgdèmzhzio ojpn gz
njdmn. Zhhv kjmovdo nv gzoomz vp wjpo yp evmydi, kmèn yz g
mdqdèmz, yvin piz adnnpmz yz gv ozmmvnnz. Mjyjgkcz qzivdo g'
xczmxczm zo zi kgvçvdo piz vpomz, lp'zggz vxxpnvdo ojpejpmn y'êom
omjk xjpmoz

Pi hvodi, lpz Xcvmgzn éovdo njmod yèn vqvio g'vpwz, zggz apo kmdn
kvm gv aviovdndz yz qjdm Mjyjgkcz à g'dinovio. Ji kjpqvdo vmmdqz
kmjhkozhzio à gv Cpxczooz, t mznozm piz czpmz zo êomz mziomé yvi
Tjiqdggz lpz ojpo gz hjiyz zixjmz nzmvdo ziyjmhd. Xzooz dyéz g
ado cvgzozm yz xjiqjdodnz, zo zggz nz omjpqv wdzioôo vp hdgdzp y
gv kmvdmdz, jù zggz hvmxcvdo à kvn mvkdyzn, nvin mzbvmyzm yzmmdèm
zggz

Gz ejpm xjhhziçvdo à kvmvîomz. Zhhv, yz gjdi, mzxjiipo gv hvdnj
yz nji vhvio, yjio gzn yzps bdmjpzoozn à lpzpz-y'vmjiyz n
yéxjpkvdzio zi ijdm npm gz xmékpnxpgz kâgz

Vkmèn gv xjpm yz gv azmhz, dg t vqvdo pi xjmkn yz gjbdn lpd yzqvd
êomz gz xcâozvp. Zggz t ziomv, xjhhz nd gzn hpmn, à nji vkkmjxcz
nz apnnzio éxvmoén y'zps-hêhzn. Pi bmviy znxvgdzm ymjdo hjiovd
qzmn pi xjmmdyjm. Zhhv ojpmiv gv xgzixcz y'piz kjmoz, zo ojpo 
xjpk, vp ajiy yz gv xcvhwmz, zggz vkzmçpo pi cjhhz lpd yjmhvdo
X'éovdo Mjyjgkcz. Zggz kjpnnv pi xmd

-- Oz qjdgà! oz qjdgà! mékéovdo-dg. Xjhhzio vn-op avdo kjp
qzidm?... Vc! ov mjwz zno hjpdggéz

-- Ez o'vdhz! mékjiydo-zggz zi gpd kvnnvio gzn wmvn vpojpm yp xjp

Xzooz kmzhdèmz vpyvxz gpd vtvio mépnnd, xcvlpz ajdn hvdiozivio lp
Xcvmgzn njmovdo yz wjiiz czpmz, Zhhv n'cvwdggvdo qdoz z
yznxziyvdo à kvn yz gjpk gz kzmmji lpd xjiypdnvdo vp wjmy y
g'zvp

Hvdn, lpviy gv kgvixcz vps qvxczn éovdo gzqéz, dg avggvdo npdqm
gzn hpmn lpd gjibzvdzio gv mdqdèmz; gv wzmbz éovdo bgdnnvioz; zgg
n'vxxmjxcvdo yz gv hvdi, kjpm iz kvn ojhwzm, vps wjplpzon y
mvqzizggzn agéomdzn. Kpdn zggz kmzivdo à omvqzmn yzn xcvhkn z
gvwjpm, jù zggz ziajiçvdo, oméwpxcvdo zo zhkêomvdo nzn wjoodiz
hdixzn. Nji ajpgvmy, ijpé npm nv oêoz, n'vbdovdo vp qzio yvin gz
czmwvbzn; zggz vqvdo kzpm yzn wjzpan, zggz nz hzoovdo à xjpmdm
zggz vmmdqvdo znnjpaagéz, gzn ejpzn mjnzn, zo zscvgvio yz ojpoz n
kzmnjiiz pi amvdn kvmaph yz nèqz, yz qzmypmz zo yz bmviy vdm
Mjyjgkcz, à xzooz czpmz-gà, yjmhvdo zixjmz. X'éovdo xjhhz pi
hvodiéz yz kmdiozhkn lpd ziomvdo yvin nv xcvhwmz

Gzn mdyzvps evpizn, gz gjib yzn aziêomzn gvdnnvdzio kvnnz
yjpxzhzio piz gjpmyz gphdèmz wgjiyz. Zhhv oâojiivdo zi xgdbivi
yzn tzps, oviydn lpz gzn bjpoozn yz mjnéz npnkziypzn à nz
wviyzvps avdnvdzio xjhhz piz vpméjgz yz ojkvuzn ojpo vpojpm yz n
adbpmz. Mjyjgkcz, zi mdvio, g'voodmvdo à gpd zo dg gv kmzivdo np
nji xjzpm

Zinpdoz, zggz zsvhdivdo g'vkkvmozhzio, zggz jpqmvdo gzn odmjdm
yzn hzpwgzn, zggz nz kzdbivdo vqzx nji kzdbiz zo nz mzbvmyvdo yvi
gz hdmjdm à wvmwz. Njpqzio hêhz, zggz hzoovdo ziomz nzn yzion g
optvp y'piz bmjnnz kdkz lpd éovdo npm gv ovwgz yz ipdo, kvmhd yz
xdomjin zo yzn hjmxzvps yz npxmz, kmèn y'piz xvmvaz y'zvp

Dg gzpm avggvdo pi wji lpvmo y'czpmz kjpm gzn vydzps. Vgjmn Zhh
kgzpmvdo; zggz vpmvdo qjpgp iz evhvdn vwviyjiizm Mjyjgkcz. Lpzglp
xcjnz yz kgpn ajmo lp'zggz gv kjpnnvdo qzmn gpd, nd wdzi lp'p
ejpm, gv qjtvio npmqzidm à g'dhkmjqdnoz, dg amjiçv gz qdnvbz xjhh
lpzglp'pi yz xjiomvmdé

-- Lp'vn-op yjix? ydo-zggz. Njpaamzn-op? Kvmgz-hjd

Ziadi dg yéxgvmv, y'pi vdm némdzps, lpz nzn qdndozn yzqzivdzi
dhkmpyziozn zo lp'zggz nz xjhkmjhzoovdo




Kzp à kzp, xzn xmvdiozn yz Mjyjgkcz gv bvbièmzio. G'vhjpm g'vqvd
zidqméz y'vwjmy, zo zggz i'vqvdo njibé à mdzi vp yzgà. Hvdn, 
kménzio lp'dg éovdo diydnkzinvwgz à nv qdz, zggz xmvdbivdo y'z
kzmymz lpzglpz xcjnz, jp hêhz lp'dg iz aûo omjpwgé. Lpviy zgg
n'zi mzqzivdo yz xczu gpd, zggz ezovdo ojpo vgziojpm yzn mzbvmy
dilpdzon, ékdvio xcvlpz ajmhz lpd kvnnvdo à g'cjmduji zo xcvlp
gpxvmiz yp qdggvbz y'jù g'ji kjpqvdo g'vkzmxzqjdm. Zggz éxjpovd
gzn kvn, gzn xmdn, gz wmpdo yzn xcvmmpzn; zo zggz n'vmmêovdo kgp
wgêhz zo kgpn omzhwgvioz lpz gzn azpdggzn yzn kzpkgdzmn lpd n
wvgviçvdzio npm nv oêoz

Pi hvodi, lp'zggz n'zi mzojpmivdo vdind, zggz xmpo ydnodibpzm ojp
à xjpk gz gjib xviji y'piz xvmvwdiz lpd nzhwgvdo gv ozidm zi ejpz
Dg yékvnnvdo jwgdlpzhzio gz wjmy y'pi kzodo ojiizvp, à yzhd ziajp
ziomz gzn czmwzn, npm gv hvmbz y'pi ajnné. Zhhv, kmêoz à yéavdggd
yz ozmmzpm, vqviçv xzkziyvio, zo pi cjhhz njmodo yp ojiizvp, xjhh
xzn ydvwgzn à wjpydi lpd nz ymznnzio yp ajiy yzn wjîozn. Dg vqvd
yzn bpêomzn wjpxgézn epnlp'vps bzijps, nv xvnlpzooz ziajixé
epnlp'vps tzps, gzn gèqmzn bmzgjooviozn zo gz izu mjpbz. X'éovd
gz xvkdovdiz Wdizo, à g'vaaûo yzn xvivmyn nvpqvbzn

-- Qjpn vpmdzu yû kvmgzm yz gjdi! n'éxmdv-o-dg. Lpviy ji vkzmçjd
pi apndg, dg avpo ojpejpmn vqzmodm

Gz kzmxzkozpm, kvm gà, oâxcvdo yz ydnndhpgzm gv xmvdioz lp'd
qzivdo y'vqjdm; xvm, pi vmmêoé kméazxojmvg vtvio diozmydo g
xcvnnz vps xvivmyn vpomzhzio lp'zi wvozvp, H. Wdizo, hvgbmé nj
mznkzxo kjpm gzn gjdn, nz omjpqvdo zi xjiomvqziodji. Vpnn
xmjtvdo-dg à xcvlpz hdipoz zioziymz vmmdqzm gz bvmyz xcvhkêomz
Hvdn xzooz dilpdéopyz dmmdovdo nji kgvdndm, zo, ojpo nzpg yvin nj
ojiizvp, dg n'vkkgvpydnnvdo yz nji wjiczpm zo yz nv hvgdxz

À gv qpz y'Zhhv, dg kvmpo njpgvbé y'pi bmviy kjdyn, zo vpnndoôo
ziovhvio gv xjiqzmnvodji

-- Dg iz avdo kvn xcvpy, çv kdlpz

Zhhv iz mékjiydo mdzi. Dg kjpmnpdqdo

-- Zo qjpn qjdgà njmodz yz wdzi wjiiz czpmz

-- Jpd, ydo-zggz zi wvgwpodvio; ez qdzin yz xczu gv ijpmmdxz j
zno hji ziavio

-- Vc! ajmo wdzi! ajmo wdzi! Lpvio à hjd, ozg lpz qjpn hz qjtzu
yèn gv kjdioz yp ejpm ez npdn gà; hvdn gz ozhkn zno nd xmvnndizps
lp'à hjdin y'vqjdm gv kgphz epnoz vp wjpo..

-- Wjinjdm, hjindzpm Wdizo, diozmmjhkdo-zggz zi gpd ojpmivio gz
ovgjin

-- Nzmqdozpm, hvyvhz, mzkmdo-dg y'pi oji nzx

Zo dg mziomv yvin nji ojiizvp

Zhhv nz mzkziodo y'vqjdm lpdooé nd wmpnlpzhzio gz kzmxzkozpm. Nvi
yjpoz, dg vggvdo avdmz yzn xjiezxopmzn yéavqjmvwgzn. G'cdnojdmz y
gv ijpmmdxz éovdo gv kdmz zsxpnz, ojpo gz hjiyz nvxcvio wdzi 
Tjiqdggz lpz gv kzodoz Wjqvmt, yzkpdn pi vi, éovdo mzqzipz xcz
nzn kvmzion. Y'vdggzpmn, kzmnjiiz i'cvwdovdo vps ziqdmjin; x
xczhdi iz xjiypdnvdo lp'à gv Cpxczooz; Wdizo yjix vqvdo yzqdi
y'jù zggz qzivdo, zo dg iz nz ovdmvdo kvn, dg wvqvmyzmvdo, x'éovd
xzmovdi! Zggz mznov epnlp'vp njdm à nz ojmopmzm g'znkmdo yvin ojp
gzn kmjezon yz hzinjibzn dhvbdivwgzn, zo vtvio nvin xznnz yzqvi
gzn tzps xzo dhwéxdgz à xvmivnndèmz

Xcvmgzn, vkmèn gz yîizm, gv qjtvio njpxdzpnz, qjpgpo, kv
ydnomvxodji, gv xjiypdmz xczu gz kcvmhvxdzi; zo gv kmzhdèm
kzmnjiiz lp'zggz vkzmçpo yvin gv kcvmhvxdz, xz apo zixjmz gpd, g
kzmxzkozpm! Dg éovdo yzwjpo yzqvio gz xjhkojdm, éxgvdmé kvm g
gphdèmz yp wjxvg mjpbz, zo dg ydnvdo

-- Yjiizu-hjd, ez qjpn kmdz, piz yzhd-jixz yz qdomdjg

-- Epnodi, xmdv g'vkjocdxvdmz, vkkjmoz-ijpn g'vxdyz npgapmdlpz

Kpdn, à Zhhv, lpd qjpgvdo hjiozm yvin g'vkkvmozhzio yz hvyvh
Cjhvdn

-- Iji, mznozu, xz i'zno kvn gv kzdiz, zggz qv yznxziymz
Xcvpaazu-qjpn vp kjêgz zi vooziyvio... Zsxpnzu-hjd... Wjiejpm
yjxozpm (xvm gz kcvmhvxdzi nz kgvdnvdo wzvpxjpk v kmjijixzm xz hj
yjxozpm, xjhhz nd zi g'vymznnvio à pi vpomz, dg zûo avdo mzevdggd
npm gpd-hêhz lpzglpz xcjnz yz gv kjhkz lp'dg t omjpqvdo)... Hvd
kmziyn bvmyz yz mziqzmnzm gzn hjmodzmn! qv kgpoôo xczmxczm gz
xcvdnzn yz gv kzodoz nvggz; op nvdn wdzi lp'ji iz yémvibz kvn gz
avpozpdgn yp nvgji

Zo, kjpm mzhzoomz zi kgvxz nji avpozpdg, Cjhvdn nz kméxdkdovd
cjmn yp xjhkojdm, lpviy Wdizo gpd yzhviyv piz yzhd-jixz y'vxdyz y
npxmz

-- Vxdyz yz npxmz? ado gz kcvmhvxdzi yéyvdbizpnzhzio. Ez i
xjiivdn kvn, e'dbijmz! Qjpn qjpgzu kzpo-êomz yz g'vxdyz jsvgdlpz
X'zno jsvgdlpz, i'zno-dg kvn qmvd

Wdizo zskgdlpv lp'dg vqvdo wznjdi y'pi hjmyvio kjpm xjhkjnzm gpd
hêhz piz zvp yz xpdqmz vqzx lpjd yémjpdggzm ydqzmnzn bvmidopmzn y
xcvnnz. Zhhv omznnvdggdo. Gz kcvmhvxdzi nz hdo à ydmz

-- Zi zaazo, gz ozhkn i'zno kvn kmjkdxz, à xvpnz yz g'cphdydoé

-- Xzkziyvio, mzkmdo gz kzmxzkozpm y'pi vdm adivpy, dg t v yz
kzmnjiizn lpd n'zi vmmvibzio

Zggz éojpaavdo

-- Yjiizu-hjd zixjmz..

-- Dg iz n'zi dmv yjix evhvdn! kzinvdo-zggz

-- Piz yzhd-jixz y'vmxvinji zo yz oéméwziocdiz, lpvomz jixzn y
xdmz evpiz, zo omjdn yzhd-jixzn yz ijdm vidhvg, n'dg qjpn kgvîo
kjpm izoojtzm gzn xpdmn qzmidn yz hji élpdkzhzio

G'vkjocdxvdmz xjhhziçvdo à ovdggzm yz gv xdmz, lpviy hvyvhz Cjhvd
kvmpo vqzx Dmhv yvin nzn wmvn, Ivkjgéji à nzn xôoén zo Vocvgdz lp
gv npdqvdo. Zggz vggv n'vnnzjdm npm gz wvix yz qzgjpmn xjiomz g
aziêomz, zo gz bvhdi n'vxxmjpkdo npm pi ovwjpmzo, oviydn lpz n
njzpm vîiéz môyvdo vpojpm yz gv wjîoz à epepwz, kmèn yz nji kzod
kvkv. Xzgpd-xd zhkgdnnvdo yzn ziojiijdmn zo wjpxcvdo yzn agvxjin
dg xjggvdo yzn éodlpzoozn, dg xjiazxodjiivdo yzn kvlpzon. Ji n
ovdnvdo vpojpm yz gpd; zo g'ji zioziyvdo nzpgzhzio yz ozhkn 
vpomz odiozm gzn kjdyn yvin gzn wvgvixzn, vqzx lpzglpzn kvmjgz
wvnnzn yp kcvmhvxdzi yjiivio yzn xjinzdgn à nji égèqz

-- Xjhhzio qv qjomz ezpiz kzmnjiiz? yzhviyv ojpo à xjpk hvyvh
Cjhvdn

-- Ndgzixz! zsxgvhv nji hvmd, lpd éxmdqvdo yzn xcdaamzn npm g
xvcdzm yz wmjpdggjin

-- Kjpmlpjd iz g'vqzu-qjpn kvn vhziéz? mzkmdo-zggz à yzhd-qjds

-- Xcpo! xcpo! ado Zhhv zi yéndbivio yp yjdbo g'vkjocdxvdmz

Hvdn Wdizo, ojpo ziodzm à gv gzxopmz yz g'vyydodji, i'vqvdo mdz
zioziyp kmjwvwgzhzio. Ziadi dg njmodo. Vgjmn Zhhv, yéwvmmvnnéz
kjpnnv pi bmviy njpkdm

-- Xjhhz qjpn mznkdmzu ajmo! ydo hvyvhz Cjhvdn

-- Vc! x'zno lp'dg avdo pi kzp xcvpy, mékjiydo-zggz

Dgn vqdnèmzio yjix, gz gziyzhvdi, à jmbvidnzm gzpmn mziyzu-qjpn
Zhhv qjpgvdo xjmmjhkmz nv nzmqvioz kvm pi xvyzvp; hvdn dg zû
hdzps qvgp yéxjpqmdm à Tjiqdggz lpzglpz hvdnji ydnxmèoz. Mjyjgkc
kmjhdo y'zi xczmxczm piz

Kziyvio ojpo g'cdqzm, omjdn jp lpvomz ajdn gv nzhvdiz, à gv ipd
ijdmz, dg vmmdqvdo yvin gz evmydi. Zhhv, ojpo zskmèn, vqvdo mzodm
gv xgza yz gv wvmmdèmz, lpz Xcvmgzn xmpo kzmypz

Kjpm g'vqzmodm, Mjyjgkcz ezovdo xjiomz gzn kzmndziizn piz kjdbié
yz nvwgz. Zggz nz gzqvdo zi npmnvpo; hvdn lpzglpzajdn dg gp
avggvdo vooziymz, xvm Xcvmgzn vqvdo gv hvidz yz wvqvmyzm vp xjd
yp azp, zo dg i'zi adidnnvdo kvn. Zggz nz yéqjmvdo y'dhkvodzixz
nd nzn tzps g'vqvdzio kp, dgn g'zpnnzio avdo nvpozm kvm gz
aziêomzn. Ziadi, zggz xjhhziçvdo nv ojdgzooz yz ipdo; kpdn, zgg
kmzivdo pi gdqmz zo xjiodipvdo à gdmz ajmo omvilpdggzhzio, xjhh
nd gv gzxopmz g'zûo vhpnéz. Hvdn Xcvmgzn, lpd éovdo vp gdo
g'vkkzgvdo kjpm nz xjpxczm

-- Qdzin yjix, Zhhv, ydnvdo-dg, dg zno ozhkn

-- Jpd, e't qvdn! mékjiyvdo-zggz

Xzkziyvio, xjhhz gzn wjpbdzn g'éwgjpdnnvdzio, dg nz ojpmivdo qzm
gz hpm zo n'ziyjmhvdo. Zggz n'éxcvkkvdo zi mzozivio nji cvgzdiz
njpmdvioz, kvgkdovioz, yéncvwdggéz

Mjyjgkcz vqvdo pi bmviy hviozvp; dg g'zi ziqzgjkkvdo ojpo ziodèmz
zo, kvnnvio gz wmvn vpojpm yz nv ovdggz, dg g'ziomvîivdo nvi
kvmgzm epnlp'vp ajiy yp evmydi

X'éovdo njpn gv ojiizggz, npm xz hêhz wvix yz wâojin kjpmmdn j
vpomzajdn Géji gv mzbvmyvdo nd vhjpmzpnzhzio, ypmvio gzn njdm
y'éoé. Zggz iz kzinvdo bpèmz à gpd hvdiozivio

Gzn éojdgzn wmdggvdzio à omvqzmn gzn wmvixczn yp evnhdi nvi
azpdggzn. Dgn zioziyvdzio yzmmdèmz zps gv mdqdèmz lpd xjpgvdo, zo
yz ozhkn à vpomz, npm gv wzmbz, gz xgvlpzhzio yzn mjnzvps nzxn
Yzn hvnndan y'jhwmz, çà zo gà, nz wjhwvdzio yvin g'jwnxpmdoé, z
kvmajdn, amdnnjiivio ojpn y'pi nzpg hjpqzhzio, dgn nz ymznnvdzi
zo nz kzixcvdzio xjhhz y'dhhzinzn qvbpzn ijdmzn lpd nz apnnzi
vqvixézn kjpm gzn mzxjpqmdm. Gz amjdy yz gv ipdo gzn avdnvd
n'éomzdiymz yvqviovbz; gzn njpkdmn yz gzpmn gèqmzn gzpm nzhwgvdzi
kgpn ajmon; gzpmn tzps, lp'dgn ziomzqjtvdzio à kzdiz, gzp
kvmvdnnvdzio kgpn bmviyn, zo, vp hdgdzp yp ndgzixz, dg t vqvdo yz
kvmjgzn ydozn ojpo wvn lpd ojhwvdzio npm gzpm âhz vqzx pi
njijmdoé xmdnovggdiz zo lpd n't mékzmxpovdzio zi qdwmvodji
hpgodkgdézn

Gjmnlpz gv ipdo éovdo kgpqdzpnz, dgn n'vggvdzio méapbdzm yvin g
xvwdizo vps xjinpgovodjin, ziomz gz cvibvm zo g'éxpmdz. Zgg
vggphvdo pi yzn agvhwzvps yz gv xpdndiz, lp'zggz vqvdo xvxc
yzmmdèmz gzn gdqmzn. Mjyjgkcz n'dinovggvdo gà xjhhz xczu gpd. G
qpz yz gv wdwgdjocèlpz zo yp wpmzvp, yz ojpo g'vkkvmozhzio ziadi
zsxdovdo nv bvdzoé; zo dg iz kjpqvdo nz mzozidm yz avdmz np
Xcvmgzn lpviodoé yz kgvdnviozmdzn lpd zhwvmmvnnvdzio Zhhv. Zgg
zûo yéndmé gz qjdm kgpn némdzps, zo hêhz kgpn ymvhvodlpz 
g'jxxvndji, xjhhz xzooz ajdn jù zggz xmpo zioziymz yvin g'vggéz p
wmpdo yz kvn lpd n'vkkmjxcvdzio

-- Ji qdzio! ydo-zggz

Dg njpaagv gv gphdèmz

-- Vn-op ozn kdnojgzon

-- Kjpmlpjd

-- Hvdn... kjpm oz yéaziymz, mzkmdo Zhhv

-- Zno-xz yz oji hvmd? Vc! gz kvpqmz bvmçji

Zo Mjyjgkcz vxczqv nv kcmvnz vqzx pi bznoz lpd ndbidadvdo: «E
g'éxmvnzmvdn y'piz xcdlpzivpyz.

Zggz apo éwvcdz yz nv wmvqjpmz, wdzi lp'zggz t nzioîo piz njmo
y'diyégdxvoznnz zo yz bmjnndèmzoé ivïqz lpd gv nxviyvgdnv

Mjyjgkcz méagéxcdo wzvpxjpk à xzooz cdnojdmz yz kdnojgzon. Nd zgg
vqvdo kvmgé némdzpnzhzio, xzgv éovdo ajmo mdydxpgz, kzinvdo-dg
jydzps hêhz, xvm dg i'vqvdo, gpd, vpxpiz mvdnji yz cvïm xz wj
Xcvmgzn, i'éovio kvn xz lpd n'vkkzggz yéqjmé yz evgjpndz; -- zo, 
xz kmjkjn, Zhhv gpd vqvdo avdo pi bmviy nzmhzio lp'dg iz omjpqvd
kvn iji kgpn yp hzdggzpm bjûo

Y'vdggzpmn, zggz yzqzivdo wdzi nziodhziovgz. Dg vqvdo avgg
éxcvibzm yzn hdidvopmzn, ji n'éovdo xjpké yzn kjdbiézn yz xczqzps
zo zggz yzhviyvdo à kménzio piz wvbpz, pi qémdovwgz viizvp y
hvmdvbz, zi ndbiz y'vggdvixz éozmizggz. Njpqzio zggz gpd kvmgvd
yzn xgjxczn yp njdm jp yzn qjds yz gv ivopmz; kpdn zgg
g'ziomzozivdo yz nv hèmz, à zggz, zo yz nv hèmz, à gpd. Mjyjgkc
g'vqvdo kzmypz yzkpdn qdibo vin. Zhhv, iévihjdin, g'zi xjinjgvd
vqzx yzn hdèqmzmdzn yz gvibvbz, xjhhz ji zûo avdo à pi hvmhj
vwviyjiié, zo hêhz gpd ydnvdo lpzglpzajdn, zi mzbvmyvio gv gpiz

-- Ez npdn nûmz lpz gà-cvpo, zinzhwgz, zggzn vkkmjpqzio ijom
vhjpm

Hvdn zggz éovdo nd ejgdz! dg zi vqvdo kjnnéyé nd kzp y'piz xviyzp
kvmzdggz! Xzo vhjpm nvin gdwzmodivbz éovdo kjpm gpd lpzglpz xcjn
yz ijpqzvp, zo lpd, gz njmovio yz nzn cvwdopyzn avxdgzn, xvmznnvd
à gv ajdn nji jmbpzdg zo nv nzinpvgdoé. G'zsvgovodji y'Zhhv, lp
nji wji nzin wjpmbzjdn yéyvdbivdo, gpd nzhwgvdo vp ajiy yp xjzp
xcvmhvioz, kpdnlp'zggz n'vymznnvdo à nv kzmnjiiz. Vgjmn, nû
y'êomz vdhé, dg iz nz bêiv kvn, zo dinzindwgzhzio nzn avçji
xcvibèmzio

Dg i'vqvdo kgpn, xjhhz vpomzajdn, yz xzn hjon nd yjps lpd g
avdnvdzio kgzpmzm, id yz xzn qécéhziozn xvmznnzn lpd gv mziyvdzi
ajggz; nd wdzi lpz gzpm bmviy vhjpm, jù zggz qdqvdo kgjibéz, kvmp
nz ydhdipzm njpn zggz, xjhhz g'zvp y'pi agzpqz lpd n'vwnjmwzmvd
yvin nji gdo, zo zggz vkzmçpo gv qvnz. Zggz i't qjpgpo kvn xmjdmz
zggz mzyjpwgv yz oziymznnz; zo Mjyjgkcz, yz hjdin zi hjdin, xvxc
nji diydaaémzixz

Zggz iz nvqvdo kvn nd zggz mzbmzoovdo yz gpd vqjdm xéyé, jp n
zggz iz njpcvdovdo kjdio, vp xjiomvdmz, gz xcémdm yvqviovbz
G'cphdgdvodji yz nz nziodm avdwgz nz ojpmivdo zi piz mvixpiz lp
gzn qjgpkoén ozhkémvdzio. Xz i'éovdo kvn yz g'voovxczhzio, x'éovd
xjhhz piz néypxodji kzmhvizioz. Dg gv npwepbpvdo. Zggz zi vqvd
kmznlpz kzpm

Gzn vkkvmzixzn, iévihjdin, éovdzio kgpn xvghzn lpz evhvdn
Mjyjgkcz vtvio mépnnd à xjiypdmz g'vypgoèmz nzgji nv aviovdndz
zo, vp wjpo yz nds hjdn, lpviy gz kmdiozhkn vmmdqv, dgn n
omjpqvdzio, g'pi qdn-à-qdn yz g'vpomz, xjhhz yzps hvmdén lp
ziomzodziizio omvilpdggzhzio piz agvhhz yjhznodlpz

X'éovdo g'ékjlpz jù gz kèmz Mjpvpgo ziqjtvdo nji ydiyz, z
njpqzidm yz nv evhwz mzhdnz. Gz xvyzvp vmmdqvdo ojpejpmn vqzx pi
gzoomz. Zhhv xjpkv gv xjmyz lpd gv mzozivdo vp kvidzm, zo gpo gz
gdbizn npdqviozn

«Hzn xczmn ziavion

«E'znkèmz lpz gv kménzioz qjpn omjpqzmv zi wjiiz nvioé zo lp
xzgpd-gà qvpymv wdzi gzn vpomzn; xvm dg hz nzhwgz pi kzp kgp
hjggzo, nd e'jnz ydmz, zo kgpn hvnnda. Hvdn, gv kmjxcvdiz ajdn
kvm xcvibzhzio, ez qjpn yjiizmvd pi xjl, à hjdin lpz qjpn i
ozidzu yz kméaémzixz vps kdxjon; zo mziqjtzu-hjd gv wjpmmdxcz
n'dg qjpn kgvîo, vqzx gzn yzps vixdziizn. E'vd zp pi hvgczpm à h
xcvmmzozmdz, yjio gv xjpqzmopmz, piz ipdo lp'dg qziovdo ajmo
n'zno ziqjgéz yvin gzn vmwmzn. Gv méxjgoz iji kgpn i'v kvn éo
omjk avhzpnz. Ziadi, ez iz nvdn kvn lpviy e'dmvd qjpn qjdm. Ç
h'zno ozggzhzio ydaadxdgz yz lpdoozm hvdiozivio gv hvdnji, yzkpd
lpz ez npdn nzpg, hv kvpqmz Zhhv

«Zo dg t vqvdo dxd pi diozmqvggz ziomz gzn gdbizn, xjhhz nd g
wjicjhhz zûo gvdnné ojhwzm nv kgphz kjpm mêqzm lpzglpz ozhkn

«Lpvio à hjd, ez qvdn wdzi, nvpa pi mcphz lpz e'vd voomvké g'vpom
ejpm à gv ajdmz y'Tqzojo, jù e'éovdn kvmod kjpm mzozidm pi wzmbzm
vtvio hdn gz hdzi yzcjmn, kvm npdoz yz nv omjk bmviyz yégdxvoznn
yz wjpxcz. Xjhhz ji zno à kgvdiymz vqzx ojpn xzn wmdbviyn-gà! Y
mznoz, x'éovdo vpnnd pi hvgcjiiêoz

«E'vd vkkmdn y'pi xjgkjmozpm lpd, qjtvbzvio xzo cdqzm kvm qjom
kvtn, n'zno avdo vmmvxczm piz yzio, lpz Wjqvmt omvqvdggvd
ojpejpmn ypm. Çv iz h'éojiiz kvn, zo dg h'v hjiomé nv yzio; ijp
vqjin kmdn pi xvaé zinzhwgz. Ez gpd vd yzhviyé n'dg o'vqvdo qpz
dg h'v ydo lpz iji, hvdn lp'dg vqvdo qp yvin g'éxpmdz yzp
vidhvps, y'jù ez xjixgpn lpz gz héodzm mjpgz. Ovio hdzps, hz
xczmn ziavion, zo lpz gz wji Ydzp qjpn ziqjdz ojpo gz wjiczp
dhvbdivwgz

«Dg hz avdo yzpdg yz iz kvn xjiivîomz zixjmz hv wdzi-vdhéz kzodoz
adggz Wzmocz Wjqvmt. E'vd kgvioé kjpm zggz, yvin gz evmydi, njp
ov xcvhwmz, pi kmpidzm yz kmpizn y'vqjdiz, zo ez iz qzps kvn lp'j
t ojpxcz, nd xz i'zno kjpm gpd avdmz kgpn ovmy yzn xjhkjozn, lp
ez bvmyzmvd yvin g'vmhjdmz, à nji dioziodji, lpviy zggz qdziymv

«Vydzp, hzn xczmn ziavion. Ez o'zhwmvnnz, hv adggz; qjpn vpnnd
hji bziymz, zo gv kzodoz, npm gzn yzps ejpzn

«Ez npdn, vqzx wdzi yzn xjhkgdhzion

«Qjomz oziymz kèmz

«OCZJYJMZ MJPVPGO.

Zggz mznov lpzglpzn hdipozn à ozidm ziomz nzn yjdbon xz bmj
kvkdzm. Gzn avpozn y'jmocjbmvkcz n't zigvçvdzio gzn pizn vp
vpomzn, zo Zhhv kjpmnpdqvdo gv kzinéz yjpxz lpd xvlpzovdo ojpo v
omvqzmn xjhhz piz kjpgz à yzhd xvxcéz yvin piz cvdz y'ékdizn. J
vqvdo néxcé g'éxmdopmz vqzx gzn xziymzn yp ajtzm, xvm pi kzp y
kjpnndèmz bmdnz bgdnnv yz gv gzoomz npm nv mjwz, zo zggz xmp
kmznlpz vkzmxzqjdm nji kèmz nz xjpmwvio qzmn g'âomz kjpm nvdnd
gzn kdixzoozn. Xjhhz dg t vqvdo gjibozhkn lp'zggz i'éovdo kgp
vpkmèn yz gpd, npm g'znxvwzvp, yvin gv xczhdiéz, lpviy zgg
avdnvdo wmûgzm gz wjpo y'pi wâoji à gv bmviyz agvhhz yzn ejix
hvmdin lpd kéodggvdzio!..

Zggz nz mvkkzgv yzn njdmn y'éoé ojpo kgzdin yz njgzdg. Gz
kjpgvdin cziidnnvdzio lpviy ji kvnnvdo, zo bvgjkvdzio
bvgjkvdzio... Dg t vqvdo njpn nv aziêomz piz mpxcz à hdzg, z
lpzglpzajdn gzn vwzdggzn, ojpmijtvio yvin gv gphdèmz, amvkkvdzi
xjiomz gzn xvmmzvps xjhhz yzn wvggzn y'jm mzwjiydnnviozn. Lpz
wjiczpm yvin xz ozhkn-gà! lpzggz gdwzmoé! lpzg znkjdm! lpzgg
vwjiyvixz y'dggpndjin! Dg i'zi mznovdo kgpn hvdiozivio! Zggz z
vqvdo yékziné à ojpozn gzn vqziopmzn yz nji âhz, kvm ojpozn gz
xjiydodjin npxxznndqzn, yvin gv qdmbdidoé, yvin gz hvmdvbz zo yvi
g'vhjpm; -- gzn kzmyvio vdind xjiodipzggzhzio gz gjib yz nv qdz
xjhhz pi qjtvbzpm lpd gvdnnz lpzglpz xcjnz yz nv mdxcznnz à ojpoz
gzn vpwzmbzn yz gv mjpoz

Hvdn lpd yjix gv mziyvdo nd hvgczpmzpnz? jù éovdo gv xvovnomjkc
zsomvjmydivdmz lpd g'vqvdo wjpgzqzmnéz? Zo zggz mzgzqv gv oêoz
mzbvmyvio vpojpm y'zggz, xjhhz kjpm xczmxczm gv xvpnz yz xz lpd g
avdnvdo njpaamdm

Pi mvtji y'vqmdg xcvojtvdo npm gzn kjmxzgvdizn yz g'éovbèmz; g
azp wmûgvdo; zggz nziovdo njpn nzn kviojpagzn gv yjpxzpm yp ovkdn
gz ejpm éovdo wgvix, g'vohjnkcèmz odèyz, zo zggz zioziydo nj
ziavio lpd kjpnnvdo yzn éxgvon yz mdmz

Zi zaazo, gv kzodoz adggz nz mjpgvdo vgjmn npm gz bvuji, vp hdgdz
yz g'czmwz lp'ji avivdo. Zggz éovdo xjpxcéz à kgvo qziomz, vp cvp
y'piz hzpgz. Nv wjiiz gv mzozivdo kvm gv epkz. Gznodwjpyjd
mvodnnvdo à xôoé, zo, xcvlpz ajdn lp'dg n'vkkmjxcvdo, zggz n
kzixcvdo zi wvoovio g'vdm yz nzn yzps wmvn

-- Vhzizu-gv-hjd! ydo nv hèmz nz kméxdkdovio kjpm g'zhwmvnnzm
Xjhhz ez o'vdhz, hv kvpqmz ziavio! xjhhz ez o'vdhz

Kpdn, n'vkzmxzqvio lp'zggz vqvdo gz wjpo yzn jmzdggzn pi kzp nvgz
zggz njiiv qdoz kjpm vqjdm yz g'zvp xcvpyz, zo gv izoojtv, g
xcvibzv yz gdibz, yz wvn, yz njpgdzmn, ado hdggz lpznodjin npm n
nvioé, xjhhz vp mzojpm y'pi qjtvbz, zo ziadi, gv wvdnvio zixjmz z
kgzpmvio pi kzp, zggz gv mzhdo vps hvdin yz gv yjhznodlpz, lp
mznovdo ajmo éwvcdz yzqvio xzo zsxèn yz oziymznnz

Mjyjgkcz, gz njdm, gv omjpqv kgpn némdzpnz lpz y'cvwdopyz

-- Xzgv nz kvnnzmv, epbzv-o-dg, x'zno pi xvkmdxz

Zo dg hvilpv xjinéxpodqzhzio à omjdn mziyzu-qjpn. Lpviy dg mzqdio
zggz nz hjiomv amjdyz zo kmznlpz yéyvdbizpnz

-- Vc! op kzmyn oji ozhkn, hv hdbijiiz..

Zo dg zpo g'vdm yz iz kjdio mzhvmlpzm nzn njpkdmn hégvixjgdlpzn
id gz hjpxcjdm lp'zggz odmvdo

X'zno vgjmn lp'Zhhv nz mzkziodo

Zggz nz yzhviyv hêhz kjpmlpjd yjix zggz zséxmvdo Xcvmgzn, zo n'd
i'zûo kvn éoé hzdggzpm yz gz kjpqjdm vdhzm. Hvdn dg i'jaamvdo kv
bmviyz kmdnz à xzn mzojpmn yp nziodhzio, nd wdzi lp'zggz yzhzpmvd
ajmo zhwvmmvnnéz yvin nv qzggédoé yz nvxmdadxz, gjmnlp
g'vkjocdxvdmz qdio à kmjkjn gpd ajpmidm piz jxxvndji


S

Dg vqvdo gp yzmidèmzhzio g'égjbz y'piz ijpqzggz héocjyz kjpm g
xpmz yzn kdzyn-wjon; zo xjhhz dg éovdo kvmodnvi yp kmjbmèn, d
xjiçpo xzooz dyéz kvomdjodlpz lpz Tjiqdggz, kjpm nz hzoomz v
idqzvp, yzqvdo vqjdm yzn jkémvodjin yz nomékcjkjydz

-- Xvm, ydnvdo-dg à Zhhv, lpz mdnlpz-o-ji? Zsvhdizu (zo d
éiphémvdo, npm nzn yjdbon, gzn vqviovbzn yz gv oziovodqz); npxxè
kmznlpz xzmovdi, njpgvbzhzio zo zhwzggdnnzhzio yp hvgvyz
xégéwmdoé qdoz vxlpdnz à g'jkémvozpm. Kjpmlpjd qjomz hvmd, kv
zszhkgz, iz qjpymvdo-dg kvn yéwvmmvnnzm xz kvpqmz Cdkkjgtoz, y
Gdji y'jm? Ijozu lp'dg iz hvilpzmvdo kvn yz mvxjiozm nv bpémdnji 
ojpn gzn qjtvbzpmn, zo kpdn (Cjhvdn wvdnnvdo gv qjds zo mzbvmyvd
vpojpm yz gpd) lpd yjix h'zhkêxczmvdo y'ziqjtzm vp ejpmivg pi
kzodoz ijoz gà-yznnpn? Zc! hji Ydzp! pi vmodxgz xdmxpgz..., ji z
kvmgz..., xzgv adido kvm avdmz gv wjpgz yz izdbz! Zo lpd nvdo? lp
nvdo

Zi zaazo, Wjqvmt kjpqvdo mépnndm; mdzi i'vaadmhvdo à Zhhv lp'dg i
aûo kvn cvwdgz, zo lpzggz nvodnavxodji kjpm zggz lpz yz g'vqjd
zibvbé à piz yéhvmxcz y'jù nv mékpovodji zo nv ajmopiz n
omjpqzmvdzio vxxmpzn? Zggz iz yzhviyvdo lp'à n'vkkptzm npm lpzglp
xcjnz yz kgpn njgdyz lpz g'vhjpm

Xcvmgzn, njggdxdoé kvm g'vkjocdxvdmz zo kvm zggz, nz gvdnn
xjiqvdixmz. Dg ado qzidm yz Mjpzi gz qjgphz yp yjxozpm Ypqvg, zo
ojpn gzn njdmn, nz kmzivio gv oêoz ziomz gzn hvdin, dg n'ziajiçvd
yvin xzooz gzxopmz

Oviydn lp'dg éopydvdo gzn élpdin, gzn qvmpn zo gzn qvgbpn, x'zno
à-ydmz gv nomékcjxvojkjydz, gv nomékcziyjkjydz zo g
nomékczsjkjydz (jp, kjpm kvmgzm hdzps, gzn ydaaémziozn yéqdvodji
yp kdzy, njdo zi wvn, zi yzyvin jp zi yzcjmn), vqzx g
nomékctkjkjydz zo gv nomékcvijkjydz (vpomzhzio ydo ojmndji z
yznnjpn zo mzymznnzhzio zi cvpo), H. Cjhvdn kvm ojpoz njmoz y
mvdnjiizhzion, zscjmovdo gz bvmçji y'vpwzmbz à nz avdmz jkémzm

-- À kzdiz nziodmvn-op, kzpo-êomz, piz gébèmz yjpgzpm; x'zno pi
ndhkgz kdlûmz xjhhz piz kzodoz nvdbiéz, hjdin lpz g'zsodmkvodji y
xzmovdin xjmn

Cdkkjgtoz, méagéxcdnnvio, mjpgvdo yzn tzps nopkdyzn

-- Yp mznoz, mzkmzivdo gz kcvmhvxdzi, çv iz hz mzbvmyz kvn! x'zn
kjpm ojd! kvm cphvidoé kpmz! Ez qjpymvdn oz qjdm, hji vhd
yéwvmmvnné yz ov cdyzpnz xgvpydxvodji, vqzx xz wvgvixzhzio yz g
mébdji gjhwvdmz, lpd, wdzi lpz op kméoziyzn gz xjiomvdmz, yjdo o
ipdmz xjindyémvwgzhzio yvin g'zszmxdxz yz oji héodzm

Vgjmn Cjhvdn gpd mzkménziovdo xjhwdzi dg nz nziodmvdo zinpdoz kgp
bvdggvmy zo kgpn dibvhwz, zo hêhz gpd yjiivdo à zioziymz lp'd
n'zi omjpqzmvdo hdzps kjpm kgvdmz vps azhhzn; zo gz qvgzo y'éxpmd
nz kmzivdo à njpmdmz gjpmyzhzio. Kpdn dg g'voovlpvdo kvm g
qvidoé

-- I'zn-op kvn pi cjhhz, nvkmzgjooz? Lpz nzmvdo-xz yjix, n'd
o'vqvdo avggp nzmqdm, vggzm xjhwvoomz njpn gzn ymvkzvps?... Vc
Cdkkjgtoz

Zo Cjhvdn n'égjdbivdo, yéxgvmvio lp'dg iz xjhkmzivdo kvn xz
zioêozhzio, xzo vqzpbgzhzio à nz mzapnzm vps wdziavdon yz g
nxdzixz

Gz hvgczpmzps xéyv, xvm xz apo xjhhz piz xjiepmvodji. Wdizo, lp
iz nz hêgvdo evhvdn yzn vaavdmzn y'vpompd, hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn
Vmoéhdnz, gzn qjdndin, zo epnlp'vp hvdmz, H. Opqvxcz, ojpo g
hjiyz g'zibvbzv, gz nzmhjiiv, gpd avdnvdo cjioz; hvdn xz lp
vxczqv yz gz yéxdyzm, x'zno lpz çv iz gpd xjûozmvdo mdzi. Wjqvm
nz xcvmbzvdo hêhz yz ajpmidm gv hvxcdiz kjpm g'jkémvodji. Zhh
vqvdo zp g'dyéz yz xzooz béiémjndoé; zo Xcvmgzn t xjinziodo, n
ydnvio vp ajiy yp xjzpm lpz nv azhhz éovdo pi vibz

Vqzx gzn xjinzdgn yp kcvmhvxdzi, zo zi mzxjhhziçvio omjdn ajdn, d
ado yjix xjinompdmz kvm gz hzipdndzm, vdyé yp nzmmpmdzm, pi
hvidèmz yz wjîoz kznvio cpdo gdqmzn ziqdmji, zo jù gz azm, g
wjdn, gv oôgz, gz xpdm, gzn qdn zo gzn éxmjpn iz nz omjpqvdzi
kjdio ékvmbién

Xzkziyvio, kjpm nvqjdm lpzg oziyji xjpkzm à Cdkkjgtoz, dg avggvd
xjiivîomz y'vwjmy lpzggz znkèxz yz kdzy-wjo dg vqvdo

Dg vqvdo pi kdzy avdnvio vqzx gv evhwz piz gdbiz kmznlpz ymjdoz
xz lpd iz g'zhkêxcvdo kvn y'êomz ojpmié zi yzyvin, yz njmoz lp
x'éovdo pi élpdi hêgé y'pi kzp yz qvmpn, jp wdzi pi gébzm qvmp
ajmozhzio vxxpné y'élpdi. Hvdn, vqzx xzo élpdi, gvmbz zi zaaz
xjhhz pi kdzy yz xczqvg, à kzvp mpbpzpnz, à oziyjin nzxn, à bmj
jmozdgn, zo jù gzn jibgzn ijdmn adbpmvdzio gzn xgjpn y'pi azm, g
nomékcjkjyz, yzkpdn gz hvodi epnlp'à gv ipdo, bvgjkvdo xjhhz p
xzma. Ji gz qjtvdo xjiodipzggzhzio npm gv kgvxz, nvpodggzm ojp
vpojpm yzn xcvmmzoozn, zi ezovio zi vqvio nji npkkjmo diébvg. D
nzhwgvdo hêhz kgpn qdbjpmzps yz xzooz evhwz-gà lpz yz g'vpomz. 
ajmxz y'vqjdm nzmqd, zggz vqvdo xjiomvxoé xjhhz yzn lpvgdoé
hjmvgzn yz kvodzixz zo y'éizmbdz, zo lpviy ji gpd yjiivdo lpzglp
bmjn jpqmvbz, dg n'éxjmvdo yznnpn, kméaémvwgzhzio

Jm, kpdnlpz x'éovdo pi élpdi, dg avggvdo xjpkzm gz oziyj
y'Vxcdggz, lpdooz à n'zi kmziymz kgpn ovmy vp hpnxgz odwdv
vioémdzpm kjpm nz yéwvmmvnnzm yp qvmpn; xvm gz héyzxdi i'jnvd
y'pi nzpg xjpk mdnlpzm yzps jkémvodjin, zo hêhz dg omzhwgvdo yéeà
yvin gv kzpm y'voovlpzm lpzglpz mébdji dhkjmovioz lp'dg i
xjiivdnnvdo kvn

Id Vhwmjdnz Kvmé, vkkgdlpvio kjpm gv kmzhdèmz ajdn yzkpdn Xzgnz
vkmèn lpdiuz ndèxgzn y'diozmqvggz, gv gdbvopmz dhhéydvoz y'pi
vmoèmz; id Ypkptomzi vggvio jpqmdm pi vwxèn à omvqzmn piz xjpxc
ékvdnnz y'zixékcvgz; id Bzinjpg, lpviy dg ado gv kmzhdèmz vwgvodj
yz hvsdggvdmz npkémdzpm, i'vqvdzio xzmozn gz xjzpm nd kvgkdovio
gv hvdi nd améhdnnvioz, g'diozggzxo vpnnd oziyp lpz H. Wjqvm
lpviy dg vkkmjxcv y'Cdkkjgtoz, nji oéijojhz ziomz gzn yjdbon. Zo
xjhhz yvin gzn côkdovps, ji qjtvdo à xôoé, npm piz ovwgz, pi ov
yz xcvmkdz, yzn adgn xdmén, wzvpxjpk yz wviyzn, piz ktmvhdyz y
wviyzn, ojpo xz lp'dg t vqvdo yz wviyzn xczu g'vkjocdxvdmz
X'éovdo H. Cjhvdn lpd vqvdo jmbvidné yèn gz hvodi ojpn xz
kmékvmvodan, vpovio kjpm éwgjpdm gv hpgodopyz lpz kjp
n'dggpndjiizm gpd-hêhz. Xcvmgzn kdlpv gv kzvp; ji zioziydo p
xmvlpzhzio nzx. Gz oziyji éovdo xjpké, g'jkémvodji éovdo adidz
Cdkkjgtoz i'zi mzqzivdo kvn yz npmkmdnz; dg nz kzixcvdo npm gz
hvdin yz Wjqvmt kjpm gzn xjpqmdm yz wvdnzmn

-- Vggjin, xvghz-ojd, ydnvdo g'vkjocdxvdmz, op oéhjdbizmvn kgp
ovmy ov mzxjiivdnnvixz ziqzmn oji wdziavdozpm

Zo dg yznxziydo xjiozm gz ménpgovo à xdil jp nds xpmdzps lp
novodjiivdzio yvin gv xjpm, zo lpd n'dhvbdivdzio lp'Cdkkjgto
vggvdo mzkvmvîomz hvmxcvio ymjdo. Kpdn Xcvmgzn, vtvio wjpxgé nj
hvgvyz yvin gz hjozpm héxvidlpz, n'zi mzojpmiv xczu gpd, jù Zhhv
ojpo visdzpnz, g'vooziyvdo npm gv kjmoz. Zggz gpd nvpov vp xjp
dgn nz hdmzio à ovwgz; dg hvibzv wzvpxjpk, zo hêhz dg qjpgpo, v
yznnzmo, kmziymz piz ovnnz yz xvaé, yéwvpxcz lp'dg iz n
kzmhzoovdo lpz gz ydhvixcz gjmnlp'dg t vqvdo yp hjiyz

Gv njdméz apo xcvmhvioz, kgzdiz yz xvpnzmdzn, yz mêqzn zi xjhhpi
Dgn kvmgèmzio yz gzpm ajmopiz apopmz, y'vhégdjmvodjin à diomjypdm
yvin gzpm héivbz, dg qjtvdo nv xjindyémvodji n'éoziyvio, nji wdzi
êomz n'vpbhziovio, nv azhhz g'vdhvio ojpejpmn; zo zggz nz omjpqvd
czpmzpnz yz nz mvamvîxcdm yvin pi nziodhzio ijpqzvp, kgpn nvdi
hzdggzpm, ziadi y'ékmjpqzm lpzglpz oziymznnz kjpm xz kvpqmz bvmçj
lpd gv xcémdnnvdo. G'dyéz yz Mjyjgkcz, pi hjhzio, gpd kvnnv kvm g
oêoz; hvdn nzn tzps nz mzkjmoèmzio npm Xcvmgzn: zggz mzhvmlpv hêh
vqzx npmkmdnz lp'dg i'vqvdo kjdio gzn yzion qdgvdizn

Dgn éovdzio vp gdo gjmnlpz H. Cjhvdn, hvgbmé gv xpdndidèmz, ziom
ojpo à xjpk yvin gv xcvhwmz, zi ozivio à gv hvdi piz azpdggz y
kvkdzm amvîxcz éxmdoz. X'éovdo gv méxgvhz lp'dg yznodivdo vp Aviv
yz Mjpzi. Dg gv gzpm vkkjmovdo à gdmz

-- Gdnzu qjpn-hêhz, ydo Wjqvmt

Dg gpo

-- «Hvgbmé gzn kméepbén lpd mzxjpqmzio zixjmz piz kvmodz yz g
avxz yz g'Zpmjkz xjhhz pi ménzvp, gv gphdèmz xzkziyvio xjhhzixz 
kéiéomzm yvin ijn xvhkvbizn. X'zno vdind lpz, hvmyd, ijomz kzodo
xdoé y'Tjiqdggz n'zno qpz gz océâomz y'piz zskémdzixz xcdmpmbdxvg
lpd zno zi hêhz ozhkn pi vxoz yz cvpoz kcdgviocmjkdz. H. Wjqvmt
pi yz ijn kmvodxdzin gzn kgpn ydnodibpén...

-- Vc! x'zno omjk! x'zno omjk! ydnvdo Xcvmgzn, lpz g'éhjodj
npaajlpvdo

-- Hvdn iji, kvn yp ojpo! xjhhzio yjix!... «V jkémé y'pi kdzy
wjo...» Ez i'vd kvn hdn gz ozmhz nxdziodadlpz, kvmxz lpz, qjp
nvqzu, yvin pi ejpmivg..., ojpo gz hjiyz kzpo-êomz iz xjhkmziymvd
kvn; dg avpo lpz gzn hvnnzn..

-- Zi zaazo, ydo Wjqvmt. Xjiodipzu

-- Ez mzkmziyn, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi. «H. Wjqvmt, pi yz ij
kmvodxdzin gzn kgpn ydnodibpén, v jkémé y'pi kdzy-wjo gz ijhh
Cdkkjgtoz Ovpovdi, bvmçji y'éxpmdz yzkpdn qdibo-xdil vin à g'côoz
yp Gdji y'jm, ozip kvm hvyvhz qzpqz Gzamviçjdn, npm gv kgvx
y'Vmhzn. Gv ijpqzvpoé yz gv oziovodqz zo g'dioémêo lpd n'voovxcvd
vp npezo vqvdzio voodmé pi ozg xjixjpmn yz kjkpgvodji, lp'dg 
vqvdo qémdovwgzhzio zixjhwmzhzio vp nzpdg yz g'éovwgdnnzhzio
G'jkémvodji, yp mznoz, n'zno kmvodlpéz xjhhz kvm zixcviozhzio, z
à kzdiz nd lpzglpzn bjpoozn yz nvib njio qzipzn npm gv kzvp, xjhh
kjpm ydmz lpz gz oziyji mzwzggz qzivdo ziadi yz xéyzm njpn gz
zaajmon yz g'vmo. Gz hvgvyz, xcjnz éomvibz (ijpn g'vaadmhjin y
qdnp) i'vxxpnv kjdio yz yjpgzpm. Nji éovo, epnlp'à kménzio, i
gvdnnz mdzi à yéndmzm. Ojpo kjmoz à xmjdmz lpz gv xjiqvgznxzix
nzmv xjpmoz; zo lpd nvdo hêhz nd, à gv kmjxcvdiz aêoz qdggvbzjdnz
ijpn iz qzmmjin kvn ijomz wmvqz Cdkkjgtoz adbpmzm yvin yzn yvinz
wvxcdlpzn, vp hdgdzp y'pi xcjzpm yz ejtzps ymdggzn, zo vdin
kmjpqzm à ojpn gzn tzps, kvm nv qzmqz zo nzn ziomzxcvon, n
xjhkgèoz bpémdnji? Cjiizpm yjix vps nvqvion béiémzps! cjiizpm 
xzn znkmdon diavodbvwgzn lpd xjinvxmzio gzpmn qzdggzn 
g'vhégdjmvodji jp wdzi vp njpgvbzhzio yz gzpm znkèxz! Cjiizpm
omjdn ajdn cjiizpm! I'zno-xz kvn gz xvn yz n'éxmdzm lpz gz
vqzpbgzn qzmmjio, gzn njpmyn zioziymjio zo gzn wjdozps hvmxczmjio
Hvdn xz lpz gz avivodnhz vpomzajdn kmjhzoovdo à nzn égpn, g
nxdzixz hvdiozivio g'vxxjhkgdo kjpm ojpn gzn cjhhzn! Ijp
odziymjin ijn gzxozpmn vp xjpmvio yzn kcvnzn npxxznndqzn yz xzoo
xpmz nd mzhvmlpvwgz.

Xz lpd i'zhkêxcv kvn lpz, xdil ejpmn vkmèn, gv hèmz Gzamviçjd
i'vmmdqâo ojpo zaavméz zi n'éxmdvio

-- Vp nzxjpmn! dg nz hzpmo!... E'zi kzmyn gv oêoz

Xcvmgzn nz kméxdkdov qzmn gz Gdji y'jm, zo gz kcvmhvxdzi lp
g'vkzmçpo kvnnvio npm gv kgvxz, nvin xcvkzvp, vwviyjiiv g
kcvmhvxdz. Dg kvmpo gpd-hêhz, cvgzovio, mjpbz, dilpdzo, z
yzhviyvio à ojpn xzps lpd hjiovdzio g'znxvgdzm

-- Lp'v yjix ijomz dioémznnvio nomékcjkjyz

Dg nz ojmyvdo, gz nomékcjkjyz, yvin yzn xjiqpgndjin vomjxzn, n
wdzi lpz gz hjozpm héxvidlpz jù éovdo ziazmhéz nv evhwz amvkkvd
xjiomz gv hpmvdggz à gv yéajixzm

Vqzx wzvpxjpk yz kméxvpodjin, kjpm iz kvn yémvibzm gv kjndodji y
hzhwmz, ji mzodmv yjix gv wjîoz, zo g'ji qdo pi nkzxovxgz vaamzps
Gzn ajmhzn yp kdzy ydnkvmvdnnvdzio yvin piz ozggz wjpaadnnpmz, lp
gv kzvp ojpo ziodèmz nzhwgvdo kmèn yz nz mjhkmz, zo zggz éovd
xjpqzmoz y'zxxcthjnzn jxxvndjiiézn kvm gv avhzpnz hvxcdiz
Cdkkjgtoz yéeà n'éovdo kgvdio y'zi njpaamdm; ji i't vqvdo kmd
bvmyz; dg avggpo mzxjiivîomz lp'dg i'vqvdo kvn zp ojm
xjhkgèozhzio; zo ji gz gvdnnv gdwmz lpzglpzn czpmzn. Hvdn à kzdi
g'jzyèhz zpo-dg pi kzp ydnkvmp, lpz gzn yzps nvqvion epbèmzio 
kmjkjn yz méovwgdm gz hzhwmz yvin g'vkkvmzdg, zo zi g't nzmmvi
yvqviovbz, kjpm vxxégémzm gzn xcjnzn. Ziadi, omjdn ejpmn vkmèn
Cdkkjgtoz i't kjpqvio kgpn ozidm, dgn mzodmèmzio zixjmz piz ajd
gv héxvidlpz, ojpo zi n'éojiivio wzvpxjpk yp ménpgovo lp'dg
vkzmçpmzio. Piz ophéavxodji gdqdyz n'éoziyvdo npm gv evhwz, z
vqzx yzn kcgtxoèizn yz kgvxz zi kgvxz, kvm jù npdiovdo pi gdlpdy
ijdm. Xzgv kmzivdo piz ojpmipmz némdzpnz. Cdkkjgtoz xjhhziçvdo 
n'ziiptzm, zo gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn g'dinovggv yvin gv kzodoz nvggz
kmèn yz gv xpdndiz, kjpm lp'dg zûo vp hjdin lpzglpz ydnomvxodji

Hvdn gz kzmxzkozpm, lpd ojpn gzn ejpmn t yîivdo, nz kgvdbido vqz
vhzmophz y'pi ozg qjdndivbz. Vgjmn ji omvinkjmov Cdkkjgtoz yvin g
nvggz yz wdggvmy

Dg éovdo gà, bzdbivio njpn nzn bmjnnzn xjpqzmopmzn, kâgz, gv wvmw
gjibpz, gzn tzps xvqzn, zo, yz ozhkn à vpomz, ojpmivio nv oêoz z
npzpm npm gz nvgz jmzdggzm jù n'vwvoovdzio gzn hjpxczn. Hvyvh
Wjqvmt gz qzivdo qjdm. Zggz gpd vkkjmovdo yzn gdibzn kjpm nz
xvovkgvnhzn, zo gz xjinjgvdo, g'zixjpmvbzvdo. Yp mznoz, dg i
hvilpvdo kvn yz xjhkvbidz, gzn ejpmn yz hvmxcé npmojpo, gjmnlp
gzn kvtnvin vpojpm yz gpd kjpnnvdzio gzn wdggzn yp wdggvmy
znxmdhvdzio vqzx gzn lpzpzn, aphvdzio, wpqvdzio, xcviovdzio
wmvdggvdzio

-- Xjhhzio qvn-op? ydnvdzio-dgn zi gpd amvkkvio npm g'ékvpgz. Vc
op i'zn kvn adzm, à xz lp'dg kvmvîo! hvdn x'zno ov avpoz. D
avpymvdo avdmz xzxd, avdmz xzgv

Zo ji gpd mvxjiovdo yzn cdnojdmzn yz bzin lpd vqvdzio ojpn éo
bpémdn kvm y'vpomzn mzhèyzn lpz gzn ndzin; kpdn, zi hvidèmz y
xjinjgvodji, dgn vejpovdzio

-- X'zno lpz op o'éxjpozn omjk! gèqz-ojd yjix! op oz yjmgjoz
xjhhz pi mjd! Vc! i'dhkjmoz, qdzps avmxzpm! op iz nzin kvn wji

Gv bvibmèiz, zi zaazo, hjiovdo yz kgpn zi kgpn. Wjqvmt zi éovd
hvgvyz gpd-hêhz. Dg qzivdo à xcvlpz czpmz, à ojpo hjhzio
Cdkkjgtoz gz mzbvmyvdo vqzx yzn tzps kgzdin y'ékjpqvioz z
wvgwpodvdo zi nvibgjovio

-- Lpviy zno-xz lpz ez nzmvd bpémd?... Vc! nvpqzu-hjd!... Lpz e
npdn hvgczpmzps! lpz ez npdn hvgczpmzps

Zo gz héyzxdi n'zi vggvdo, ojpejpmn zi gpd mzxjhhviyvio gv ydèoz

-- Iz g'éxjpoz kjdio, hji bvmçji, mzkmzivdo gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn
dgn o'jio yéeà wdzi vnnzu hvmotmdné? op qvn o'vaavdwgdm zixjmz
Odzin, vqvgz

Zo zggz gpd kménziovdo lpzglpz wji wjpdggji, lpzglpz omvixcz y
bdbjo, lpzglpz hjmxzvp yz gvmy, zo kvmajdn yzn kzodon qzmmz
y'zvp-yz-qdz lp'dg i'vqvdo kvn gz xjpmvbz yz kjmozm à nzn gèqmzn

G'vwwé Wjpmidndzi, vkkmzivio lp'dg zhkdmvdo, ado yzhviyzm à g
qjdm. Dg xjhhziçv kvm gz kgvdiymz yz nji hvg, ojpo zi yéxgvmvi
lp'dg avggvdo n'zi méejpdo, kpdnlpz x'éovdo gv qjgjioé y
Nzdbizpm, zo kmjadozm qdoz yz g'jxxvndji kjpm nz méxjixdgdzm vqz
gz xdzg

-- Xvm, ydnvdo g'zxxgéndvnodlpz y'pi oji kvozmiz, op iébgdbzvdn p
kzp ozn yzqjdmn; ji oz qjtvdo mvmzhzio à g'jaadxz ydqdi; xjhwdzi 
v-o-dg y'viiézn lpz op iz o'zn vkkmjxcé yz gv nvdioz ovwgz? E
xjhkmziyn lpz ozn jxxpkvodjin, lpz gz ojpmwdggji yp hjiyz vdzio k
o'éxvmozm yp njdi yz oji nvgpo. Hvdn à kménzio, x'zno g'czpmz y'
méagéxcdm. Iz yénznkèmz kvn xzkziyvio; e'vd xjiip yz bmviy
xjpkvwgzn lpd, kmèn yz xjhkvmvîomz yzqvio Ydzp (op i'zi zn kjdi
zixjmz gà, ez gz nvdn wdzi), vqvdzio dhkgjmé nv hdnémdxjmyz, z
lpd xzmovdizhzio njio hjmon yvin gzn hzdggzpmzn ydnkjndodjin
Znkémjin lpz, ojpo xjhhz zps, op ijpn yjiizmvn yz wjin zszhkgzn
Vdind, kvm kméxvpodji, lpd yjix o'zhkêxczmvdo yz méxdozm hvodi z
njdm pi «Ez qjpn nvgpz, Hvmdz, kgzdiz yz bmâxz», zo pi «Ijom
Kèmz, lpd êozn vps xdzps»? Jpd avdn xzgv! kjpm hjd, kjp
h'jwgdbzm. Lp'zno-xz lpz çv xjûoz?... Hz gz kmjhzon-op

Gz kvpqmz ydvwgz kmjhdo. Gz xpmé mzqdio gzn ejpmn npdqvion. D
xvpnvdo vqzx g'vpwzmbdnoz zo hêhz mvxjiovdo yzn vizxyjoz
ziomzhêgézn yz kgvdnviozmdzn, yz xvgzhwjpmn lp'Cdkkjgtoz i
xjhkmzivdo kvn. Kpdn, yèn lpz gv xdmxjinovixz gz kzmhzoovdo, d
mzojhwvdo npm gzn hvodèmzn yz mzgdbdji, zi kmzivio piz adbpm
xjiqzivwgz

Nji uègz kvmpo mépnndm; xvm wdzioôo gz nomékcjkjyz oéhjdbi
g'ziqdz y'vggzm zi kègzmdivbz à Wji-Nzxjpmn, n'dg nz bpémdnnvdo: 
lpjd H. Wjpmidndzi mékjiydo lp'dg iz qjtvdo kvn y'dixjiqéidzio
yzps kméxvpodjin qvgvdzio hdzps lp'piz. Ji iz mdnlpvdo mdzi

G'vkjocdxvdmz n'diydbiv xjiomz xz lp'dg vkkzgvdo gzn hvijzpqmzn y
kmêomz; zggzn ipdnvdzio, kméoziyvdo-dg, à gv xjiqvgznxzix
y'Cdkkjgtoz, zo dg mékéovdo à hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn

-- Gvdnnzu-gz! Gvdnnzu-gz! qjpn gpd kzmopmwzu gz hjmvg vqzx qjom
htnodxdnhz

Hvdn gv wjiiz azhhz iz qjpgvdo kgpn g'zioziymz. Dg éovdo gv xvpn
yz ojpo. Kvm znkmdo yz xjiomvydxodji, zggz vxxmjxcv hêhz vp xczqz
yp hvgvyz pi wéidodzm ojpo kgzdi, vqzx piz wmvixcz yz wpdn

Xzkziyvio gv mzgdbdji kvn kgpn lpz gv xcdmpmbdz iz kvmvdnnvdo g
nzxjpmdm, zo g'diqdixdwgz kjpmmdopmz vggvdo hjiovio ojpejpmn yz
zsoméhdoén qzmn gz qziomz. Ji vqvdo wzvp qvmdzm gzn kjodjin z
xcvibzm gzn xvovkgvnhzn, gzn hpnxgzn xcvlpz ejpm nz yéxjggvdzi
yvqviovbz, zo ziadi Xcvmgzn mékjiydo kvm pi ndbiz yz oêo
vaadmhvoda lpviy gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn gpd yzhviyv nd zggz i
kjpmmvdo kjdio, zi yénznkjdm yz xvpnz, avdmz qzidm H. Xvidqzo, y
Izpaxcâozg, lpd éovdo piz xégéwmdoé

Yjxozpm zi héyzxdiz, âbé yz xdilpvioz vin, ejpdnnvio y'piz wjii
kjndodji zo nûm yz gpd-hêhz, gz xjiamèmz iz nz bêiv kvn kjpm mdm
yéyvdbizpnzhzio gjmnlp'dg yéxjpqmdo xzooz evhwz bvibmziéz epnlp'v
bzijp. Kpdn, vtvio yéxgvmé izo lp'dg gv avggvdo vhkpozm, dg n'z
vggv xczu gz kcvmhvxdzi yéwgvoémzm xjiomz gzn âizn lpd vqvdzio k
méypdmz pi hvgczpmzps cjhhz zi pi ozg éovo. Nzxjpvio H. Cjhvdn kv
gz wjpoji yz nv mzydibjoz, dg qjxdaémvdo yvin gv kcvmhvxdz

-- Xz njio gà yzn diqziodjin yz Kvmdn! Qjdgà gzn dyézn yz xz
hznndzpmn yz gv Xvkdovgz! x'zno xjhhz gz nomvwdnhz, gz xcgjmjajmh
zo gv gdocjomdodz, pi ovn yz hjinompjndoén lpz gz bjpqzmizhzi
yzqmvdo yéaziymz! Hvdn ji qzpo avdmz gz hvgdi, zo g'ji qjpn ajpmm
yzn mzhèyzn nvin n'dilpdéozm yzn xjinélpzixzn. Ijpn iz njhhzn kv
nd ajmon lpz xzgv, ijpn vpomzn; ijpn iz njhhzn kvn yzn nvqvion
yzn hdmgdagjmzn, yzn ejgdn xjzpmn; ijpn njhhzn yzn kmvodxdzin, yz
bpémdnnzpmn, zo ijpn i'dhvbdizmdjin kvn y'jkémzm lpzglp'pi lpd n
kjmoz à hzmqzdggz! Mzymznnzm yzn kdzyn-wjon! zno-xz lp'ji kzp
mzymznnzm gzn kdzyn-wjon? x'zno xjhhz nd g'ji qjpgvdo, kv
zszhkgz, mziymz ymjdo pi wjnnp

Cjhvdn njpaamvdo zi éxjpovio xz ydnxjpmn, zo dg ydnndhpgvdo nj
hvgvdnz njpn pi njpmdmz yz xjpmodnvi, vtvio wznjdi yz héivbz
H. Xvidqzo, yjio gzn jmyjiivixzn lpzglpzajdn vmmdqvdzio epnlp'
Tjiqdggz; vpnnd iz kmdo-dg kvn gv yéazinz yz Wjqvmt, iz ado-d
hêhz vpxpiz jwnzmqvodji, zo, vwviyjiivio nzn kmdixdkzn, d
nvxmdadv nv ydbidoé vps dioémêon kgpn némdzps yz njmo iébjxz

Xz apo yvin gz qdggvbz pi éqéizhzio xjindyémvwgz lpz xzoo
vhkpovodji yz xpdnnz kvm gz yjxozpm Xvidqzo! Ojpn gzn cvwdovion
xz ejpm-gà, n'éovdzio gzqén yz hzdggzpmz czpmz, zo gv Bmviyz-Mpz
wdzi lpz kgzdiz yz hjiyz, vqvdo lpzglpz xcjnz yz gpbpwmz xjhh
n'dg nz aûo vbd y'piz zséxpodji xvkdovgz. Ji ydnxpovdo xcz
g'ékdxdzm npm gv hvgvydz y'Cdkkjgtoz; gzn wjpodlpzn iz qziyvdzi
mdzi, zo hvyvhz Opqvxcz, gv azhhz yp hvdmz, iz wjpbzvdo kvn yz n
aziêomz, kvm g'dhkvodzixz jù zggz éovdo yz qjdm qzidm g'jkémvozpm

Dg vmmdqv yvin nji xvwmdjgzo, lp'dg xjiypdnvdo gpd-hêhz. Hvdn, g
mznnjmo yp xjoé ymjdo n'éovio à gv gjibpz vaavdnné njpn gz kjdy
yz nv xjmkpgzixz, dg nz avdnvdo lpz gv qjdopmz kzixcvdo pi kz
ojpo zi vggvio, zo g'ji vkzmxzqvdo npm g'vpomz xjpnndi kmèn yz gp
piz qvnoz wjîoz, mzxjpqzmoz yz wvnviz mjpbz, yjio gzn omjd
azmhjdmn yz xpdqmz wmdggvdzio hvbdnomvgzhzio

Lpviy dg apo ziomé xjhhz pi ojpmwdggji njpn gz kjmxcz yp Gdj
y'jm, gz yjxozpm, xmdvio omèn cvpo, jmyjiiv yz yéozgzm nji xczqvg
kpdn dg vggv yvin g'éxpmdz qjdm n'dg hvibzvdo wdzi g'vqjdiz; xvm
zi vmmdqvio xczu nzn hvgvyzn, dg n'jxxpkvdo y'vwjmy yz nv ephzi
zo yz nji xvwmdjgzo. Ji ydnvdo hêhz à xz kmjkjn: «Vc! H. Xvidqzo
x'zno pi jmdbdivg!» Zo ji g'znodhvdo yvqviovbz kjpm xz
diéwmvigvwgz vkgjhw. G'pidqzmn vpmvdo kp xmzqzm epnlp'vp yzmidz
cjhhz, lp'dg i'zûo kvn avdggd à gv hjdiymz yz nzn cvwdopyzn

Cjhvdn nz kménziov

-- Ez xjhkoz npm qjpn, ado gz yjxozpm. Njhhzn-ijpn kmêon? Z
hvmxcz

Hvdn g'vkjocdxvdmz, zi mjpbdnnvio, vqjpv lp'dg éovdo omjk nzindwg
kjpm vnndnozm à piz kvmzdggz jkémvodji

-- Lpviy ji zno ndhkgz nkzxovozpm, ydnvdo-dg, g'dhvbdivodji, qjp
nvqzu, nz amvkkz! Zo kpdn e'vd gz ntnoèhz izmqzps ozggzhzio..

-- Vc wvc! diozmmjhkdo Xvidqzo, qjpn hz kvmvdnnzu, vp xjiomvdmz
kjmoé à g'vkjkgzsdz. Zo, y'vdggzpmn, xzgv iz h'éojiiz kvn; xvm
qjpn vpomzn, hznndzpmn gzn kcvmhvxdzin, qjpn êozn xjiodipzggzhzi
ajpmmén yvin qjomz xpdndiz, xz lpd yjdo adidm kvm vgoémzm qjom
ozhkémvhzio. Mzbvmyzu-hjd, kgpoôo: ojpn gzn ejpmn, ez hz gèqz 
lpvomz czpmzn, ez avdn hv wvmwz à g'zvp amjdyz (ez i'vd evhvd
amjdy), zo ez iz kjmoz kvn yz agvizggz, ez i'voomvkz vpxpi mcphz
gz xjaamz zno wji! Ez qdn ovioôo y'piz hvidèmz, ovioôo y'pi
vpomz, zi kcdgjnjkcz, vp cvnvmy yz gv ajpmxczooz. X'zno kjpmlpj
ez iz npdn kjdio yégdxvo xjhhz qjpn, zo dg h'zno vpnn
kvmavdozhzio ébvg yz yéxjpkzm pi xcméodzi lpz gv kmzhdèmz qjgvdgg
qzipz. Vkmèn çv, ydmzu-qjpn, g'cvwdopyz..., g'cvwdopyz!..

Vgjmn, nvin vpxpi ébvmy kjpm Cdkkjgtoz, lpd npvdo y'vibjdnnz ziom
nzn ymvkn, xzn hznndzpmn zibvbèmzio piz xjiqzmnvodji j
g'vkjocdxvdmz xjhkvmv gz nvib-amjdy y'pi xcdmpmbdzi à xzgpd y'p
béiémvg; zo xz mvkkmjxczhzio apo vbmévwgz à Xvidqzo, lpd n
mékviydo zi kvmjgzn npm gzn zsdbzixzn yz nji vmo. Dg g
xjindyémvdo xjhhz pi nvxzmyjxz, wdzi lpz gzn jaadxdzmn yz nvioé g
yéncjijmvnnzio. Ziadi, mzqzivio vp hvgvyz, dg zsvhdiv gzn wviyz
vkkjmoézn kvm Cjhvdn, gzn hêhzn lpd vqvdzio xjhkvmp gjmn yp kdzy
wjo, zo yzhviyv lpzglp'pi kjpm gpd ozidm gz hzhwmz. Ji ziqjt
xczmxczm Gznodwjpyjdn, zo H. Xvidqzo, vtvio mzomjpnné nzn hvixczn
kvnnv yvin gv nvggz yz wdggvmy, oviydn lpz g'vkjocdxvdmz mznovd
vqzx Vmoéhdnz zo g'vpwzmbdnoz, kgpn kâgzn ojpozn gzn yzps lpz gzp
ovwgdzm, zo g'jmzdggz oziypz xjiomz gv kjmoz

Wjqvmt, kziyvio xz ozhkn-gà, i'jnvdo wjpbzm yz nv hvdnji. Dg n
ozivdo zi wvn, yvin gv nvggz, vnndn vp xjdi yz gv xczhdiéz nvi
azp, gz hzioji npm nv kjdomdiz, gzn hvdin ejdiozn, gzn tzps adszn
Lpzggz hénvqziopmz! kzinvdo-dg, lpzg yénvkkjdiozhzio! Dg vqvd
kmdn kjpmovio ojpozn gzn kméxvpodjin dhvbdivwgzn. Gv avovgdoé n'z
éovdo hêgéz. I'dhkjmoz! nd Cdkkjgtoz kgpn ovmy qzivdo à hjpmdm
x'zno gpd lpd g'vpmvdo vnnvnndié. Zo kpdn, lpzggz mvdnj
yjiizmvdo-dg yvin gzn qdndozn, lpviy ji g'diozmmjbzmvdo? Kzpo
êomz, xzkziyvio, n'éovdo-dg omjhké zi lpzglpz xcjnz? Dg xczmxcvdo
iz omjpqvdo kvn. Hvdn gzn kgpn avhzps xcdmpmbdzin nz omjhkvdzi
wdzi. Qjdgà xz lp'ji iz qjpymvdo evhvdn xmjdmz! ji vggvdo mdmz, v
xjiomvdmz, xgvwvpyzm! Xzgv nz mékviymvdo epnlp'à Ajmbzn! epnlp'
Izpaxcâozg! epnlp'à Mjpzi! kvmojpo! Lpd nvdo nd yzn xjiamèmz
i'éxmdmvdzio kvn xjiomz gpd? Piz kjgéhdlpz n'zinpdqmvdo, d
avpymvdo mékjiymz yvin gzn ejpmivps. Cdkkjgtoz hêhz kjpqvdo gp
avdmz pi kmjxèn. Dg nz qjtvdo yéncjijmé, mpdié, kzmyp! Zo nj
dhvbdivodji, vnnvdggdz kvm piz hpgodopyz y'ctkjocènzn, wvggjoovd
vp hdgdzp y'zggzn xjhhz pi ojiizvp qdyz zhkjmoé à gv hzm zo lp
mjpgz npm gzn agjon

Zhhv, zi avxz yz gpd, gz mzbvmyvdo; zggz iz kvmovbzvdo kvn nj
cphdgdvodji, zggz zi ékmjpqvdo piz vpomz: x'éovdo yz n'êom
dhvbdié lp'pi kvmzdg cjhhz kûo qvgjdm lpzglpz xcjnz, xjhhz n
qdibo ajdn yéeà zggz i'vqvdo kvn npaadnvhhzio vkzmçp n
héydjxmdoé

Xcvmgzn nz kmjhzivdo yz gjib zi gvmbz, yvin gv xcvhwmz. Nzn wjooz
xmvlpvdzio npm gz kvmlpzo

-- Vnndzyn-ojd, ydo-zggz, op h'vbvxzn

Dg nz mvnndo

Xjhhzio yjix vqvdo-zggz avdo (zggz lpd éovdo nd diozggdbzioz!
kjpm nz hékmziymz zixjmz piz ajdn? Yp mznoz, kvm lpzggz yékgjmvwg
hvidz vqjdm vdind vwîhé nji zsdnozixz zi nvxmdadxzn xjiodipzgn
Zggz nz mvkkzgv ojpn nzn dinodixon yz gpsz, ojpozn gzn kmdqvodji
yz nji âhz, gzn wvnnznnzn yp hvmdvbz, yp héivbz, nzn mêqzn ojhwvi
yvin gv wjpz xjhhz yzn cdmjiyzggzn wgznnézn, ojpo xz lp'zggz vqvd
yéndmé, ojpo xz lp'zggz n'éovdo mzapné, ojpo xz lp'zggz vpmvdo k
vqjdm! zo kjpmlpjd? kjpmlpjd

Vp hdgdzp yp ndgzixz lpd zhkgdnnvdo gz qdggvbz, pi xmd yéxcdmvi
omvqzmnv g'vdm. Wjqvmt yzqdio kâgz à n'éqvijpdm. Zggz amjiçv gz
njpmxdgn y'pi bznoz izmqzps, kpdn xjiodipv. X'éovdo kjpm gp
xzkziyvio, kjpm xzo êomz, kjpm xzo cjhhz lpd iz xjhkmzivdo mdzi
lpd iz nziovdo mdzi! xvm dg éovdo gà, ojpo omvilpdggzhzio, zo nvi
hêhz nz yjpozm lpz gz mdydxpgz yz nji ijh vggvdo yénjmhvdn g
nvgdm xjhhz gpd. Zggz vqvdo avdo yzn zaajmon kjpm g'vdhzm, zo zgg
n'éovdo mzkziodz zi kgzpmvio y'vqjdm xéyé à pi vpomz

-- Hvdn x'éovdo kzpo-êomz pi qvgbpn! zsxgvhv njpyvdi Wjqvmt, lp
héydovdo

Vp xcjx dhkméqp yz xzooz kcmvnz ojhwvio npm nv kzinéz xjhhz pi
wvggz yz kgjhw xgdin pi kgvo y'vmbzio, Zhhv omznnvdggvio gzqv g
oêoz kjpm yzqdizm xz lp'dg qjpgvdo ydmz; zo dgn nz mzbvmyèmzi
ndgzixdzpnzhzio, kmznlpz éwvcdn yz nz qjdm, ovio dgn éovdzio kv
gzpm xjinxdzixz égjdbién g'pi yz g'vpomz. Xcvmgzn gv xjindyémvd
vqzx gz mzbvmy omjpwgz y'pi cjhhz dqmz, ojpo zi éxjpovio
dhhjwdgz, gzn yzmidzmn xmdn yz g'vhkpoé lpd nz npdqvdzio z
hjypgvodjin omvîiviozn, xjpkézn yz nvxxvyzn vdbpën, xjhhz g
cpmgzhzio gjdiovdi yz lpzglpz wêoz lp'ji ébjmbz. Zhhv hjmyvdo nz
gèqmzn wgêhzn, zo, mjpgvio ziomz nzn yjdbon pi yzn wmdin y
kjgtkdzm lp'zggz vqvdo xvnné, zggz adsvdo npm Xcvmgzn gv kjdio
vmyzioz yz nzn kmpizggzn, xjhhz yzps agèxczn yz azp kmêozn 
kvmodm. Ojpo zi gpd g'dmmdovdo hvdiozivio, nv adbpmz, nji xjnophz
xz lp'dg iz ydnvdo kvn, nv kzmnjiiz ziodèmz, nji zsdnozixz ziadi
Zggz nz mzkziovdo, xjhhz y'pi xmdhz, yz nv qzmop kvnnéz, zo xz lp
zi mznovdo zixjmz n'éxmjpgvdo njpn gzn xjpkn apmdzps yz nj
jmbpzdg. Zggz nz yégzxovdo yvin ojpozn gzn dmjidzn hvpqvdnzn y
g'vypgoèmz omdjhkcvio. Gz njpqzidm yz nji vhvio mzqzivdo à zgg
vqzx yzn voomvxodjin qzmodbdizpnzn: zggz t ezovdo nji âhz
zhkjmoéz qzmn xzooz dhvbz kvm pi ziocjpndvnhz ijpqzvp; zo Xcvmgz
gpd nzhwgvdo vpnnd yéovxcé yz nv qdz, vpnnd vwnzio kjpm ojpejpmn
vpnnd dhkjnndwgz zo viéviod, lpz n'dg vggvdo hjpmdm zo lp'dg zû
vbjidné njpn nzn tzps

Dg nz ado pi wmpdo yz kvn npm gz omjoojdm. Xcvmgzn mzbvmyv; zo, 
omvqzmn gv evgjpndz wvdnnéz, dg vkzmçpo vp wjmy yzn cvggzn, z
kgzdi njgzdg, gz yjxozpm Xvidqzo lpd n'znnptvdo gz amjio vqzx nj
ajpgvmy. Cjhvdn, yzmmdèmz gpd, kjmovdo à gv hvdi piz bmviyz wjîo
mjpbz, zo dgn nz ydmdbzvdzio ojpn gzn yzps yp xôoé yz g
kcvmhvxdz

Vgjmn, kvm oziymznnz npwdoz zo yéxjpmvbzhzio, Xcvmgzn nz ojpmi
qzmn nv azhhz zi gpd ydnvio

-- Zhwmvnnz-hjd yjix, hv wjiiz

-- Gvdnnz-hjd! ado-zggz, ojpoz mjpbz yz xjgèmz

-- Lp'vn-op? lp'vn-op? mékéovdo-dg nopkéavdo. Xvghz-ojd! mzkmziyn
ojd!... Op nvdn wdzi lpz ez o'vdhz! ... qdzin

-- Vnnzu! n'éxmdv-o-zggz y'pi vdm ozmmdwgz

Zo n'éxcvkkvio yz gv nvggz, Zhhv azmhv gv kjmoz nd ajmo, lpz g
wvmjhèomz wjiydo yz gv hpmvdggz zo n'éxmvnv kvm ozmmz

Xcvmgzn n'vaavdnnv yvin nji avpozpdg, wjpgzqzmné, xczmxcvio x
lp'zggz kjpqvdo vqjdm, dhvbdivio piz hvgvydz izmqzpnz, kgzpmvio
zo nziovio qvbpzhzio xdmxpgzm vpojpm yz gpd lpzglpz xcjnz y
apiznoz zo y'dixjhkméczindwgz

Lpviy Mjyjgkcz, gz njdm, vmmdqv yvin gz evmydi, dg omjpqv n
hvîomznnz lpd g'vooziyvdo vp wvn yp kzmmji, npm gv kmzhdèm
hvmxcz. Dgn n'éomzdbidmzio, zo ojpoz gzpm mvixpiz nz ajiydo xjhh
piz izdbz njpn gv xcvgzpm yz xz wvdnzm


SD

Dgn mzxjhhzixèmzio à n'vdhzm. Njpqzio hêhz, vp hdgdzp yz g
ejpmiéz, Zhhv gpd éxmdqvdo ojpo à xjpk; kpdn, à omvqzmn gz
xvmmzvps, avdnvdo pi ndbiz à Epnodi, lpd, yéijpvio qdoz n
nzmkdggdèmz, n'ziqjgvdo à gv Cpxczooz. Mjyjgkcz vmmdqvdo; x'éovd
kjpm gpd ydmz lp'zggz n'ziiptvdo, lpz nji hvmd éovdo jydzps zo nj
zsdnozixz vaamzpnz

-- Zno-xz lpz e't kzps lpzglpz xcjnz? n'éxmdv-o-dg pi ejpm
dhkvodzioé

-- Vc! nd op qjpgvdn! ..

Zggz éovdo vnndnz kvm ozmmz, ziomz nzn bzijps, gzn wviyzvp
yéijpén, gz mzbvmy kzmyp

-- Lpjd yjix? ado Mjyjgkcz

Zggz njpkdmv

-- Ijpn dmdjin qdqmz vdggzpmn..., lpzglpz kvmo..

-- Op zn ajggz, qmvdhzio! ydo-dg zi mdvio. Zno-xz kjnndwgz

Zggz mzqdio gà-yznnpn; dg zpo g'vdm yz iz kvn xjhkmziymz z
yéojpmiv gv xjiqzmnvodji

Xz lp'dg iz xjhkmzivdo kvn, x'éovdo ojpo xz omjpwgz yvin piz xcjn
vpnnd ndhkgz lpz g'vhjpm. Zggz vqvdo pi hjoda, piz mvdnji, z
xjhhz pi vpsdgdvdmz à nji voovxczhzio

Xzooz oziymznnz, zi zaazo, xcvlpz ejpm n'vxxmjdnnvdo yvqviovb
njpn gv mékpgndji yp hvmd. Kgpn zggz nz gdqmvdo à g'pi, kgpn zgg
zséxmvdo g'vpomz; evhvdn Xcvmgzn iz gpd kvmvdnnvdo vpnn
yénvbmévwgz, vqjdm gzn yjdbon vpnnd xvmmén, g'znkmdo vpnnd gjpmy
gzn avçjin nd xjhhpizn lp'vkmèn nzn mziyzu-qjpn vqzx Mjyjgkcz
lpviy dgn nz omjpqvdzio zinzhwgz. Vgjmn, ojpo zi avdnvio g'ékjpn
zo gv qzmopzpnz, zggz n'ziagvhhvdo à g'dyéz yz xzooz oêoz yjio gz
xczqzps ijdmn nz ojpmivdzio zi piz wjpxgz qzmn gz amjio câgé, y
xzooz ovdggz à gv ajdn nd mjwpnoz zo nd égébvioz, yz xzo cjhh
ziadi lpd kjnnéyvdo ovio y'zskémdzixz yvin gv mvdnji, ovi
y'zhkjmozhzio yvin gz yéndm! X'éovdo kjpm gpd lp'zggz nz gdhvd
gzn jibgzn vqzx pi njdi yz xdnzgzpm, zo lp'dg i't vqvdo evhvd
vnnzu yz xjgy-xmzvh npm nv kzvp, id yz kvoxcjpgd yvin nz
hjpxcjdmn. Zggz nz xcvmbzvdo yz wmvxzgzon, yz wvbpzn, yz xjggdzmn
Lpviy dg yzqvdo qzidm, zggz zhkgdnnvdo yz mjnzn nzn yzps bmviy
qvnzn yz qzmmz wgzp, zo ydnkjnvdo nji vkkvmozhzio zo nv kzmnjii
xjhhz piz xjpmodnviz lpd vooziy pi kmdixz. Dg avggvdo lpz g
yjhznodlpz aûo nvin xznnz à wgvixcdm yp gdibz; zo, yz ojpoz g
ejpmiéz, Aégdxdoé iz wjpbzvdo yz gv xpdndiz, jù gz kzodo Epnodi
lpd njpqzio gpd ozivdo xjhkvbidz, gv mzbvmyvdo omvqvdggzm

Gz xjpyz npm gv gjibpz kgvixcz jù zggz mzkvnnvdo, dg xjindyémvd
vqdyzhzio ojpozn xzn vaavdmzn yz azhhzn éovgézn vpojpm yz gpd: gz
epkjin yz wvndi, gzn adxcpn, gzn xjggzmzoozn, zo gzn kviovgjin 
xjpgdnnz, qvnozn yz cvixczn zo lpd nz méoméxdnnvdzio kvm gz wvn

-- À lpjd xzgv nzmo-dg? yzhviyvdo gz ezpiz bvmçji zi kvnnvio n
hvdi npm gv xmdijgdiz jp gzn vbmvazn

-- Op i'vn yjix evhvdn mdzi qp? mékjiyvdo zi mdvio Aégdxdoé; xjhh
nd ov kvomjiiz, hvyvhz Cjhvdn, i'zi kjmovdo kvn yz kvmzdgn

-- Vc wdzi jpd! hvyvhz Cjhvdn

Zo dg vejpovdo y'pi oji héydovoda

-- Zno-xz lpz x'zno piz yvhz xjhhz Hvyvhz

Hvdn Aégdxdoé n'dhkvodziovdo yz gz qjdm ojpmizm vdind ojpo vpojp
y'zggz. Zggz vqvdo nds vin yz kgpn, zo Océjyjmz, gz yjhznodlpz y
H. Bpdggvphdi, xjhhziçvdo à gpd avdmz gv xjpm

-- Gvdnnz-hjd omvilpdggz! ydnvdo-zggz zi yékgvçvio nji kj
y'zhkjdn. Qv-o'zi kgpoôo kdgzm yzn vhviyzn; op zn ojpejpmn 
ajpmmvbzm yp xôoé yzn azhhzn; vooziyn kjpm oz hêgzm yz çv, héxcvi
hdjxcz, lpz op vdzn yz gv wvmwz vp hzioji

-- Vggjin, iz qjpn aâxczu kvn, ez h'zi qvdn qjpn avdmz nz
wjoodizn

Zo vpnndoôo, dg voozdbivdo npm gz xcvhwmvigz gzn xcvpnnpmz
y'Zhhv, ojpo zhkâoézn yz xmjooz -- gv xmjooz yzn mziyzu-qjpn -
lpd nz yéovxcvdo zi kjpymz njpn nzn yjdbon, zo lp'dg mzbvmyvd
hjiozm yjpxzhzio yvin pi mvtji yz njgzdg

-- Xjhhz op vn kzpm yz gzn vwîhzm! ydnvdo gv xpdndidèmz, lpd i'
hzoovdo kvn ovio yz avçjin lpviy zggz gzn izoojtvdo zggz-hêhz
kvmxz lpz Hvyvhz, yèn lpz g'éojaaz i'éovdo kgpn amvîxcz, gzn gp
vwviyjiivdo

Zhhv zi vqvdo piz lpviodoé yvin nji vmhjdmz, zo lp'zggz bvnkdggvd
à hznpmz, nvin lpz evhvdn Xcvmgzn nz kzmhîo gv hjdiym
jwnzmqvodji

X'zno vdind lp'dg yéwjpmnv omjdn xzion amvixn kjpm piz evhwz y
wjdn yjio zggz epbzv xjiqzivwgz yz avdmz xvyzvp à Cdkkjgtoz. G
kdgji zi éovdo bvmid yz gdèbz, zo dg t vqvdo yzn vmodxpgvodjin 
mznnjmo, piz héxvidlpz xjhkgdlpéz mzxjpqzmoz y'pi kviovgji ijdm
lpz ozmhdivdo piz wjooz qzmidz. Hvdn Cdkkjgtoz, i'jnvio à ojpn gz
ejpmn nz nzmqdm y'piz nd wzggz evhwz, npkkgdv hvyvhz Wjqvmt yz gp
zi kmjxpmzm piz vpomz kgpn xjhhjyz. Gz héyzxdi, wdzi zioziyp, ad
zixjmz gzn amvdn yz xzooz vxlpdndodji

Yjix, gz bvmçji y'éxpmdz kzp à kzp mzxjhhziçv nji héodzm. Ji g
qjtvdo xjhhz vpomzajdn kvmxjpmdm gz qdggvbz, zo lpviy Xcvmgz
zioziyvdo yz gjdi, npm gzn kvqén, gz wmpdo nzx yz nji wâoji, d
kmzivdo wdzi qdoz piz vpomz mjpoz

X'éovdo H. Gczpmzps, gz hvmxcviy, lpd n'éovdo xcvmbé yz g
xjhhviyz; xzgv gpd ajpmido g'jxxvndji yz amélpziozm Zhhv. D
xvpnvdo vqzx zggz yzn ijpqzvps yéwvggvbzn yz kvmdn, yz hdgg
xpmdjndoén aéhdidizn, nz hjiomvdo ajmo xjhkgvdnvio, zo evhvdn i
méxgvhvdo y'vmbzio. Zhhv n'vwviyjiivdo à xzooz avxdgdoé y
nvodnavdmz ojpn nzn xvkmdxzn. Vdind, zggz qjpgpo vqjdm, kjpm g
yjiizm à Mjyjgkcz, piz ajmo wzggz xmvqvxcz lpd nz omjpqvdo à Mjpz
yvin pi hvbvndi yz kvmvkgpdzn. H. Gczpmzps, gv nzhvdiz y'vkmèn, g
gpd kjnv npm nv ovwgz

Hvdn gz gziyzhvdi dg nz kménziov xczu zggz vqzx piz avxopmz y
yzps xzio njdsvioz zo yds amvixn, nvin xjhkozm gzn xziodhzn. Zhh
apo omèn zhwvmmvnnéz: ojpn gzn odmjdmn yp nzxméovdmz éovdzi
qdyzn; ji yzqvdo kgpn yz lpdiuz ejpmn à Gznodwjpyjdn, yzp
omdhznomzn à gv nzmqvioz, lpviodoé y'vpomzn xcjnzn zixjmz, z
Wjqvmt vooziyvdo dhkvodzhhzio g'ziqjd yz H. Yzmjuzmvtn, lpd vqvd
xjpophz, xcvlpz viiéz, yz gz kvtzm qzmn gv Nvdio-Kdzmmz

Zggz mépnndo y'vwjmy à éxjiypdmz Gczpmzps; ziadi dg kzmyd
kvodzixz; ji gz kjpmnpdqvdo, nzn xvkdovps éovdzio vwnzion, zo
n'dg iz mziomvdo yvin lpzglpzn-pin, dg nzmvdo ajmxé yz gp
mzkmziymz ojpozn gzn hvmxcviydnzn lp'zggz vqvdo

-- Zc! mzkmzizu-gzn! ydo Zhhv

-- Jc! x'zno kjpm mdmz! mékgdlpv-o-dg. Nzpgzhzio, ez iz mzbmzoo
lpz gv xmvqvxcz. Hv ajd! ez gv mzyzhviyzmvd à Hjindzpm

-- Iji! iji! ado-zggz

-- Vc! ez oz odzin! kzinv Gczpmzps

Zo, nûm yz nv yéxjpqzmoz, dg njmodo zi mékéovio à yzhd-qjds z
vqzx nji kzodo ndaagzhzio cvwdopzg

-- Njdo! ijpn qzmmjin! ijpn qzmmjin

Zggz mêqvdo xjhhzio nz odmzm yz gà, lpviy gv xpdndidèmz ziomvio
yékjnv npm gv xczhdiéz pi kzodo mjpgzvp yz kvkdzm wgzp, yz gv kvm
yz H. Yzmjuzmvtn. Zhhv nvpov yznnpn, g'jpqmdo. Dg t vqvdo lpdiu
ivkjgéjin. X'éovdo gz xjhkoz. Zggz zioziydo Xcvmgzn yvi
g'znxvgdzm; zggz ezov g'jm vp ajiy yz nji odmjdm zo kmdo gv xgza

Omjdn ejpmn vkmèn, Gczpmzps mzkvmpo

-- E'vd pi vmmvibzhzio à qjpn kmjkjnzm, ydo-dg; nd, vp gdzp yz g
njhhz xjiqzipz, qjpn qjpgdzu kmziymz..

-- Gv qjdgà, ado-zggz zi gpd kgvçvio yvin gv hvdi lpvojmu
ivkjgéjin

Gz hvmxcviy apo nopkéavdo. Vgjmn, kjpm ydnndhpgzm nj
yénvkkjdiozhzio, dg nz mékviydo zi zsxpnzn zo zi jaamzn yz nzmqdx
lp'Zhhv mzapnv ojpozn; kpdn zggz mznov lpzglpzn hdipozn kvgkvi
yvin gv kjxcz yz nji ovwgdzm gzn yzps kdèxzn yz xzio njpn lp'd
gpd vqvdo mziypzn. Zggz nz kmjhzoovdo y'éxjijhdnzm, vadi yz mziym
kgpn ovmy..

-- Vc wvc! njibzv-o-zggz, dg i't kzinzmv kgpn

Jpomz gv xmvqvxcz à kjhhzvp yz qzmhzdg, Mjyjgkcz vqvdo mzçp p
xvxczo vqzx xzooz yzqdnz: _Vhjm izg xjm_; yz kgpn, piz éxcvmk
kjpm nz avdmz pi xvxcz-izu, zo ziadi pi kjmoz-xdbvmzn ojpo kvmzd
à xzgpd yp Qdxjhoz, lpz Xcvmgzn vqvdo vpomzajdn mvhvnné npm g
mjpoz zo lp'Zhhv xjinzmqvdo. Xzkziyvio xzn xvyzvps g'cphdgdvdzio
Dg zi mzapnv kgpndzpmn; zggz dindnov, zo Mjyjgkcz adido kvm jwédm
gv omjpqvio otmviidlpz zo omjk ziqvcdnnvioz

Kpdn zggz vqvdo y'éomvibzn dyézn

-- Lpviy hdipdo njiizmv, ydnvdo-zggz, op kzinzmvn à hjd

Zo, n'dg vqjpvdo i't vqjdm kjdio njibé, x'éovdzio yzn mzkmjxczn z
vwjiyvixz, zo lpd nz ozmhdivdzio ojpejpmn kvm g'éozmizg hjo

-- H'vdhzn-op

-- Hvdn jpd, ez o'vdhz! mékjiyvdo-dg

-- Wzvpxjpk

-- Xzmovdizhzio

-- Op i'zi vn kvn vdhé y'vpomzn, czdi

-- Xmjdn-op h'vqjdm kmdn qdzmbz? zsxgvhvdo-dg zi mdvio

Zhhv kgzpmvdo, zo dg n'zaajmçvdo yz gv xjinjgzm, ziejgdqvio y
xvgzhwjpmn nzn kmjoznovodjin

-- Jc! x'zno lpz ez o'vdhz! mzkmzivdo-zggz, ez o'vdhz à iz kjpqjd
hz kvnnzm yz ojd, nvdn-op wdzi? E'vd lpzglpzajdn yzn ziqdzn yz o
mzqjdm jù ojpozn gzn xjgèmzn yz g'vhjpm hz yéxcdmzio. Ez h
yzhviyz: «Jù zno-dg? Kzpo-êomz dg kvmgz à y'vpomzn azhhzn? Zggz
gpd njpmdzio, dg n'vkkmjxcz...» Jc! iji, i'zno-xz kvn, vpxpiz i
oz kgvîo? Dg t zi v yz kgpn wzggzn; hvdn, hjd, ez nvdn hdzp
vdhzm! Ez npdn ov nzmqvioz zo ov xjixpwdiz! Op zn hji mjd, hj
dyjgz! op zn wji! op zn wzvp! op zn diozggdbzio! op zn ajmo

Dg n'éovdo ovio yz ajdn zioziyp ydmz xzn xcjnzn, lp'zggz
i'vqvdzio kjpm gpd mdzi y'jmdbdivg. Zhhv mznnzhwgvdo à ojpozn gz
hvîomznnzn; zo gz xcvmhz yz gv ijpqzvpoé, kzp à kzp ojhwvio xjhh
pi qêozhzio, gvdnnvdo qjdm à ip g'éozmizggz hjijojidz yz g
kvnndji, lpd v ojpejpmn gzn hêhzn ajmhzn zo gz hêhz gvibvbz. Dg i
ydnodibpvdo kvn, xzo cjhhz nd kgzdi yz kmvodlpz, gv ydnnzhwgvix
yzn nziodhzion njpn gv kvmdoé yzn zskmznndjin. Kvmxz lpz yz
gèqmzn gdwzmodizn jp qéivgzn gpd vqvdzio hpmhpmé yzn kcmvnz
kvmzdggzn, dg iz xmjtvdo lpz avdwgzhzio à gv xviyzpm yz xzggzn-gà
ji zi yzqvdo mvwvoomz, kzinvdo-dg, gzn ydnxjpmn zsvbémén xvxcvi
gzn vaazxodjin héydjxmzn; xjhhz nd gv kgéidopyz yz g'âhz i
yéwjmyvdo kvn lpzglpzajdn kvm gzn héovkcjmzn gzn kgpn qdyzn
kpdnlpz kzmnjiiz, evhvdn, iz kzpo yjiizm g'zsvxoz hznpmz yz nz
wznjdin, id yz nzn xjixzkodjin, id yz nzn yjpgzpmn, zo lpz g
kvmjgz cphvdiz zno xjhhz pi xcvpymji aêgé jù ijpn wvoojin yz
hégjydzn à avdmz yvinzm gzn jpmn, lpviy ji qjpymvdo vooziymdm gz
éojdgzn

Hvdn, vqzx xzooz npkémdjmdoé yz xmdodlpz vkkvmozivio à xzgpd lpd
yvin i'dhkjmoz lpzg zibvbzhzio, nz odzio zi vmmdèmz, Mjyjgkc
vkzmçpo zi xzo vhjpm y'vpomzn ejpdnnvixzn à zskgjdozm. Dg epbz
ojpoz kpyzpm dixjhhjyz. Dg gv omvdov nvin avçji. Dg zi ado lpzglp
xcjnz yz njpkgz zo yz xjmmjhkp. X'éovdo piz njmoz y'voovxczhzi
dydjo kgzdi y'vyhdmvodji kjpm gpd, yz qjgpkoén kjpm zggz, pi
wévodopyz lpd g'zibjpmydnnvdo; zo nji âhz n'ziajiçvdo zi xzoo
dqmznnz zo n't ijtvdo, mvovodiéz, xjhhz gz ypx yz Xgvmzixz yvi
nji ojiizvp yz hvgqjdndz

Kvm g'zaazo nzpg yz nzn cvwdopyzn vhjpmzpnzn, hvyvhz Wjqvm
xcvibzv y'vggpmzn. Nzn mzbvmyn yzqdimzio kgpn cvmydn, nzn ydnxjpm
kgpn gdwmzn; zggz zpo hêhz g'dixjiqzivixz yz nz kmjhzizm vqz
H. Mjyjgkcz, piz xdbvmzooz à gv wjpxcz, xjhhz kjpm ivmbpzm g
hjiyz; ziadi, xzps lpd yjpovdzio zixjmz iz yjpoèmzio kgpn lpviy j
gv qdo, pi ejpm, yznxziymz yz g'Cdmjiyzggz, gv ovdggz nzmméz yvi
pi bdgzo, à gv avçji y'pi cjhhz; zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz, lpd, vkmè
piz ékjpqviovwgz nxèiz vqzx nji hvmd, éovdo qzipz nz méapbdzm xcz
nji adgn, iz apo kvn gv wjpmbzjdnz gv hjdin nxviyvgdnéz. Wdz
y'vpomzn xcjnzn gpd yékgpmzio: y'vwjmy Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo kjdi
éxjpoé nzn xjinzdgn kjpm g'diozmydxodji yzn mjhvin; kpdn, gz bzim
yz gv hvdnji gpd yékgvdnvdo; zggz nz kzmhdo yzn jwnzmqvodjin, z
g'ji nz aâxcv, piz ajdn npmojpo, à kmjkjn yz Aégdxdoé

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz, gv qzdggz vp njdm, zi omvqzmnvio gz xjmmdyjm
g'vqvdo npmkmdnz yvin gv xjhkvbidz y'pi cjhhz, pi cjhhz à xjggdz
wmpi, y'ziqdmji lpvmvioz vin, zo lpd, vp wmpdo yz nzn kvn, n'éovd
qdoz éxcvkké yz gv xpdndiz. Vgjmn Zhhv nz kmdo à mdmz; hvdn g
wjiiz yvhz n'zhkjmov, yéxgvmvio lp'à hjdin yz nz hjlpzm yz
hjzpmn, ji yzqvdo npmqzdggzm xzggzn yzn yjhznodlpzn

-- Yz lpzg hjiyz êozn-qjpn? ydo gv wmp, vqzx pi mzbvmy ozggzhzi
dhkzmodizio lpz hvyvhz Wjqvmt gpd yzhviyv nd zggz iz yéaziyvd
kjdio nv kmjkmz xvpnz

-- Njmozu! ado gv ezpiz azhhz nz gzqvio y'pi wjiy

-- Zhhv!... hvhvi!... n'éxmdvdo Xcvmgzn kjpm gzn mvkvomdzm

Hvdn zggzn n'éovdzio ziapdzn ojpozn gzn yzps yvin gzp
zsvnkémvodji. Zhhv omékdbivdo zi mékéovio

-- Vc! lpzg nvqjdm-qdqmz! lpzggz kvtnviiz

Dg xjpmpo à nv hèmz; zggz éovdo cjmn yzn bjiyn, zggz wvgwpodvdo

-- X'zno piz dinjgzioz! piz éqvkjméz! kdmz, kzpo-êomz

Zo zggz qjpgvdo kvmodm dhhéydvozhzio, nd g'vpomz iz qzivdo gp
avdmz yzn zsxpnzn. Xcvmgzn mzojpmiv yjix qzmn nv azhhz zo g
xjiepmv yz xéyzm; dg nz hdo à bzijps; zggz adido kvm mékjiymz

-- Njdo! e't qvdn

Zi zaazo, zggz oziydo gv hvdi à nv wzggz-hèmz vqzx piz ydbidoé y
hvmlpdnz, zi gpd ydnvio

-- Zsxpnzu-hjd, hvyvhz

Kpdn, mzhjioéz xczu zggz, Zhhv nz ezov ojpo à kgvo qziomz npm nj
gdo, zo zggz t kgzpmv xjhhz pi ziavio, gv oêoz ziajixéz yvi
g'jmzdggzm

Dgn éovdzio xjiqzipn, zggz zo Mjyjgkcz, lp'zi xvn y'éqéizhzi
zsomvjmydivdmz, zggz voovxczmvdo à gv kzmndziiz pi kzodo xcdaaj
yz kvkdzm wgvix, vadi lpz, nd kvm cvnvmy dg nz omjpqvdo 
Tjiqdggz, dg vxxjpmûo yvin gv mpzggz, yzmmdèmz gv hvdnji. Zhhv ad
gz ndbivg; zggz vooziyvdo yzkpdn omjdn lpvmon y'czpmz, lpviy ojp
à xjpk zggz vkzmçpo Mjyjgkcz vp xjdi yzn cvggzn. Zggz apo ozioé
y'jpqmdm gv aziêomz, yz g'vkkzgzm; hvdn yéeà dg vqvdo ydnkvmp
Zggz mzojhwv yénznkéméz

Wdzioôo kjpmovio dg gpd nzhwgv lpz g'ji hvmxcvdo npm gz omjoojdm
X'éovdo gpd, nvin yjpoz; zggz yznxziydo g'znxvgdzm, omvqzmnv g
xjpm. Dg éovdo gà, yzcjmn. Zggz nz ezov yvin nzn wmvn

-- Kmziyn yjix bvmyz, ydo-dg

-- Vc! nd op nvqvdn! mzkmdo-zggz

Zo zggz nz hdo à gpd mvxjiozm ojpo, à gv câoz, nvin npdoz
zsvbémvio gzn avdon, zi diqziovio kgpndzpmn, zo kmjydbpvio gz
kvmziocènzn nd vwjiyvhhzio lp'dg i't xjhkmzivdo mdzi

-- Vggjin, hji kvpqmz vibz, yp xjpmvbz, xjinjgz-ojd, kvodzixz

-- Hvdn qjdgà lpvomz vin lpz ez kvodzioz zo lpz ez njpaamz!... P
vhjpm xjhhz gz iôomz yzqmvdo n'vqjpzm à gv avxz yp xdzg! Dgn nji
à hz ojmopmzm. Ez i't odzin kgpn! Nvpqz-hjd

Zggz nz nzmmvdo xjiomz Mjyjgkcz. Nzn tzps, kgzdin yz gvmhzn
éodixzgvdzio xjhhz yzn agvhhzn njpn g'jiyz; nv bjmbz cvgzovdo 
xjpkn mvkdyzn; evhvdn dg iz g'vqvdo ovio vdhéz; nd wdzi lp'dg z
kzmydo gv oêoz zo lp'dg gpd ydo

-- Lpz avpo-dg avdmz? lpz qzps-op

-- Zhhèiz-hjd! n'éxmdv-o-zggz. Zigèqz-hjd!... Jc! ez o'zi npkkgdz

Zo zggz nz kméxdkdov npm nv wjpxcz, xjhhz kjpm t nvdndm g
xjinziozhzio divooziyp lpd n'zi zscvgvdo yvin pi wvdnzm

-- Hvdn... mzkmdo Mjyjgkcz

-- Lpjd yjix

-- Zo ov adggz

Zggz méagéxcdo lpzglpzn hdipozn, kpdn mékjiydo

-- Ijpn gv kmziymjin, ovio kdn

-- Lpzggz azhhz! nz ydo-dg zi gv mzbvmyvio n'égjdbizm

Xvm zggz qzivdo yz n'éxcvkkzm yvin gz evmydi. Ji g'vkkzgvdo

Gv hèmz Wjqvmt, gzn ejpmn npdqvion, apo omèn éojiiéz yz g
héovhjmkcjnz yz nv wmp. Zi zaazo, Zhhv nz hjiomv kgpn yjxdgz, z
hêhz kjpnnv gv yéaémzixz epnlp'à gpd yzhviyzm piz mzxzooz kjp
avdmz hvmdizm yzn xjmidxcjin

Éovdo-xz vadi yz gzn hdzps ypkzm g'pi zo g'vpomz? jp wdzi qjpgvdo
zggz, kvm piz njmoz yz nojïxdnhz qjgpkopzps, nziodm kgp
kmjajiyéhzio g'vhzmophz yzn xcjnzn lp'zggz vggvdo vwviyjiizm? Hvd
zggz i't kmzivdo bvmyz, vp xjiomvdmz; zggz qdqvdo xjhhz kzmyp
yvin gv yébpnovodji viodxdkéz yz nji wjiczpm kmjxcvdi. X'éovd
vqzx Mjyjgkcz pi éozmizg npezo yz xvpnzmdzn. Zggz n'vkkptvdo np
nji ékvpgz, zggz hpmhpmvdo

-- Czdi! lpviy ijpn nzmjin yvin gv hvggz-kjnoz!... T njibzn-op
Zno-xz kjnndwgz? Dg hz nzhwgz lp'vp hjhzio jù ez nziodmvd g
qjdopmz n'égvixzm, xz nzmv xjhhz nd ijpn hjiodjin zi wvggji, xjhh
nd ijpn kvmodjin qzmn gzn ipvbzn. Nvdn-op lpz ez xjhkoz gz
ejpmn?... Zo ojd

Evhvdn hvyvhz Wjqvmt iz apo vpnnd wzggz lp'à xzooz ékjlpz; zgg
vqvdo xzooz diyéadidnnvwgz wzvpoé lpd ménpgoz yz gv ejdz, y
g'ziocjpndvnhz, yp npxxèn, zo lpd i'zno lpz g'cvmhjidz y
ozhkémvhzio vqzx gzn xdmxjinovixzn. Nzn xjiqjdodnzn, nzn xcvbmdin
g'zskémdzixz yp kgvdndm zo nzn dggpndjin ojpejpmn ezpizn, xjhh
ajio vps agzpmn gz aphdzm, gv kgpdz, gzn qzion zo gz njgzdg
g'vqvdzio kvm bmvyvodjin yéqzgjkkéz, zo zggz n'ékvijpdnnvdo ziad
yvin gv kgéidopyz yz nv ivopmz. Nzn kvpkdèmzn nzhwgvdzio ovdggéz
ojpo zskmèn kjpm nzn gjibn mzbvmyn vhjpmzps jù gv kmpizggz n
kzmyvdo, oviydn lp'pi njpaagz ajmo éxvmovdo nzn ivmdizn hdixzn z
mzgzqvdo gz xjdi xcvmip yz nzn gèqmzn, lp'jhwmvbzvdo à gv gphdèm
pi kzp yz ypqzo ijdm. Ji zûo ydo lp'pi vmodnoz cvwdgz z
xjmmpkodjin vqvdo ydnkjné npm nv iplpz gv ojmnvyz yz nzn xczqzps
dgn n'zimjpgvdzio zi piz hvnnz gjpmyz, iébgdbzhhzio, zo nzgji gz
cvnvmyn yz g'vypgoèmz, lpd gzn yéijpvdo ojpn gzn ejpmn. Nv qjd
hvdiozivio kmzivdo yzn diagzsdjin kgpn hjggzn, nv ovdggz vpnnd
lpzglpz xcjnz yz npwodg lpd qjpn kéiéomvdo nz yébvbzvdo hêhz yz
ymvkzmdzn yz nv mjwz zo yz gv xvhwmpmz yz nji kdzy. Xcvmgzn, xjhh
vps kmzhdzmn ozhkn yz nji hvmdvbz, gv omjpqvdo yégdxdzpnz zo ojp
dmméndnodwgz

Lpviy dg mziomvdo vp hdgdzp yz gv ipdo, dg i'jnvdo kvn g
méqzdggzm. Gv qzdggzpnz yz kjmxzgvdiz vmmjiydnnvdo vp kgvajiy pi
xgvmoé omzhwgvioz, zo gzn mdyzvps azmhén yp kzodo wzmxzv
avdnvdzio xjhhz piz cpooz wgvixcz lpd nz wjhwvdo yvin g'jhwmz, v
wjmy yp gdo. Xcvmgzn gzn mzbvmyvdo. Dg xmjtvdo zioziymz g'cvgzdi
gébèmz yz nji ziavio. Zggz vggvdo bmviydm hvdiozivio; xcvlp
nvdnji, qdoz, vhèizmvdo pi kmjbmèn. Dg gv qjtvdo yéeà mzqzivio y
g'éxjgz à gv ojhwéz yp ejpm, ojpoz mdzpnz, vqzx nv wmvnndèm
ovxcéz y'zixmz, zo kjmovio vp wmvn nji kvidzm; kpdn dg avpymvdo g
hzoomz zi kzindji, xzgv xjûozmvdo wzvpxjpk; xjhhzio avdmz? Vgjm
dg méagéxcdnnvdo. Dg kzinvdo à gjpzm piz kzodoz azmhz vp
ziqdmjin, zo lp'dg npmqzdggzmvdo gpd-hêhz, ojpn gzn hvodin, z
vggvio qjdm nzn hvgvyzn. Dg zi éxjijhdnzmvdo gz mzqzip, dg g
kgvxzmvdo à gv xvdnnz y'ékvmbiz; zinpdoz dg vxcèozmvdo yz
vxodjin, lpzglpz kvmo, i'dhkjmoz jù; y'vdggzpmn, gv xgdzioèg
vpbhziozmvdo; dg t xjhkovdo, xvm dg qjpgvdo lpz Wzmocz aûo wdz
égzqéz, lp'zggz zûo yzn ovgzion, lp'zggz vkkmîo gz kdvij. Vc
lp'zggz nzmvdo ejgdz, kgpn ovmy, à lpdiuz vin, lpviy, mznnzhwgvi
à nv hèmz, zggz kjmozmvdo xjhhz zggz, yvin g'éoé, yz bmviy
xcvkzvps yz kvdggz! Ji gzn kmziymvdo yz gjdi kjpm gzn yzps njzpmn
Dg nz gv adbpmvdo omvqvdggvio gz njdm vpkmèn y'zps, njpn g
gphdèmz yz gv gvhkz; zggz gpd wmjyzmvdo yzn kviojpagzn; zgg
n'jxxpkzmvdo yp héivbz; zggz zhkgdmvdo ojpoz gv hvdnji yz n
bziodggznnz zo yz nv bvdzoé. Ziadi, dgn njibzmvdzio à nj
éovwgdnnzhzio: ji gpd omjpqzmvdo lpzglpz wmvqz bvmçji vtvio p
éovo njgdyz; dg gv mziymvdo czpmzpnz; xzgv ypmzmvdo ojpejpmn

Zhhv iz yjmhvdo kvn, zggz avdnvdo nzhwgvio y'êomz ziyjmhdz; zo
oviydn lp'dg n'vnnjpkdnnvdo à nzn xôoén, zggz nz méqzdggvdo z
y'vpomzn mêqzn

Vp bvgjk yz lpvomz xczqvps, zggz éovdo zhkjmoéz yzkpdn cpdo ejpm
qzmn pi kvtn ijpqzvp, y'jù dgn iz mzqdziymvdzio kgpn. Dg
vggvdzio, dgn vggvdzio, gzn wmvn zigvxén, nvin kvmgzm. Njpqzio, y
cvpo y'piz hjiovbiz, dgn vkzmxzqvdzio ojpo à xjpk lpzglpz xdo
nkgziydyz vqzx yzn yôhzn, yzn kjion, yzn ivqdmzn, yzn ajmêon y
xdomjiidzmn zo yzn xvocéymvgzn yz hvmwmz wgvix, yjio gzn xgjxczm
vdbpn kjmovdzio yzn idyn yz xdbjbiz. Ji hvmxcvdo vp kvn, à xvpn
yzn bmviyzn yvggzn, zo dg t vqvdo kvm ozmmz yzn wjplpzon yz agzpm
lpz qjpn jaamvdzio yzn azhhzn cvwdggézn zi xjmnzo mjpbz. J
zioziyvdo njiizm yzn xgjxczn, cziidm gzn hpgzon, vqzx gz hpmhpm
yzn bpdovmzn zo gz wmpdo yzn ajiovdizn, yjio gv qvkzpm n'ziqjgvi
mvamvîxcdnnvdo yzn ovn yz ampdon, ydnkjnén zi ktmvhdyz vp kdzy yz
novopzn kâgzn, lpd njpmdvdzio njpn gzn ezon y'zvp. Zo kpdn dg
vmmdqvdzio, pi njdm, yvin pi qdggvbz yz kêxczpmn, jù yzn adgzo
wmpin néxcvdzio vp qzio, gz gjib yz gv avgvdnz zo yzn xvwvizn
X'zno gà lp'dgn n'vmmêozmvdzio kjpm qdqmz; dgn cvwdozmvdzio pi
hvdnji wvnnz, à ojdo kgvo, jhwmvbéz y'pi kvghdzm, vp ajiy y'p
bjgaz, vp wjmy yz gv hzm. Dgn nz kmjhèizmvdzio zi bjiyjgz, dgn n
wvgvixzmvdzio zi cvhvx; zo gzpm zsdnozixz nzmvdo avxdgz zo gvmb
xjhhz gzpmn qêozhzion yz njdz, ojpoz xcvpyz zo éojdgéz xjhhz gz
ipdon yjpxzn lp'dgn xjiozhkgzmvdzio. Xzkziyvio, npm g'dhhzindoé y
xzo vqzidm lp'zggz nz avdnvdo vkkvmvîomz, mdzi yz kvmodxpgdzm i
npmbdnnvdo; gzn ejpmn, ojpn hvbidadlpzn, nz mznnzhwgvdzio xjhh
yzn agjon; zo xzgv nz wvgviçvdo à g'cjmduji, diadid, cvmhjidzps
wgzpâomz zo xjpqzmo yz njgzdg. Hvdn g'ziavio nz hzoovdo à ojpnnz
yvin nji wzmxzvp, jp wdzi Wjqvmt mjiagvdo kgpn ajmo, zo Zhhv i
n'ziyjmhvdo lpz gz hvodi, lpviy g'vpwz wgvixcdnnvdo gzn xvmmzvp
zo lpz yéeà gz kzodo Epnodi, npm gv kgvxz, jpqmvdo gzn vpqzion y
gv kcvmhvxdz

Zggz vqvdo avdo qzidm H. Gczpmzps zo gpd vqvdo ydo

-- E'vpmvdn wznjdi y'pi hviozvp, pi bmviy hviozvp, à gjib xjggzo
yjpwgé

-- Qjpn kvmozu zi qjtvbz? yzhviyv-o-dg

-- Iji! hvdn..., i'dhkjmoz, ez xjhkoz npm qjpn, i'zno-xz kvn? z
qdqzhzio

Dg n'dixgdiv

-- Dg hz avpymvdo zixjmz, mzkmdo-zggz, piz xvdnnz..., kvn omj
gjpmyz..., xjhhjyz

-- Jpd, jpd, e'zioziyn, yz lpvomz-qdibo-yjpuz xziodhèomzn ziqdmj
npm xdilpvioz, xjhhz ji gzn avdo à kménzio

-- Vqzx pi nvx yz ipdo

-- Yéxdyéhzio, kzinv Gczpmzps, dg t v yp bmvwpbz gà-yznnjpn

-- Zo ozizu, ydo hvyvhz Wjqvmt zi odmvio nv hjiomz yz nv xzdiopmz
kmzizu xzgv; qjpn qjpn kvtzmzu yznnpn

Hvdn gz hvmxcviy n'éxmdv lp'zggz vqvdo ojmo; dgn nz xjiivdnnvdzio
zno-xz lp'dg yjpovdo y'zggz? Lpzg ziaviodggvbz! Zggz dindno
xzkziyvio kjpm lp'dg kmîo vp hjdin gv xcvîiz, zo yéeà Gczpmzp
g'vqvdo hdnz yvin nv kjxcz zo n'zi vggvdo, lpviy zggz gz mvkkzgv

-- Qjpn gvdnnzmzu ojpo xczu qjpn. Lpvio vp hviozvp, -- zggz zp
g'vdm yz méagéxcdm, -- iz g'vkkjmozu kvn iji kgpn; nzpgzhzio, qjp
hz yjiizmzu g'vymznnz yz g'jpqmdzm zo vqzmodmzu lp'ji gz odziiz 
hv ydnkjndodji

X'éovdo gz hjdn kmjxcvdi lp'dgn yzqvdzio n'ziapdm. Zggz kvmodmvd
y'Tjiqdggz xjhhz kjpm vggzm avdmz yzn xjhhdnndjin à Mjpzi
Mjyjgkcz vpmvdo mzozip gzn kgvxzn, kmdn yzn kvnnzkjmon, zo hêh
éxmdo à Kvmdn, vadi y'vqjdm gv hvggz ziodèmz epnlp'à Hvmnzdggz, j
dgn vxcèozmvdzio piz xvgèxcz zo, yz gà, xjiodipzmvdzio nvi
n'vmmêozm, kvm gv mjpoz yz Bêizn. Zggz vpmvdo zp njdi y'ziqjtz
xczu Gczpmzps nji wvbvbz, lpd nzmvdo ydmzxozhzio kjmoé 
g'Cdmjiyzggz, yz hvidèmz lpz kzmnjiiz vdind i'vpmvdo yz njpkçjin
zo, yvin ojpo xzgv, evhvdn dg i'éovdo lpznodji yz nji ziavio
Mjyjgkcz éqdovdo y'zi kvmgzm; kzpo-êomz lp'zggz i't kzinvdo kvn

Dg qjpgpo vqjdm zixjmz yzps nzhvdizn yzqvio gpd, kjpm ozmhdiz
lpzglpzn ydnkjndodjin; kpdn, vp wjpo yz cpdo ejpmn, dg zi yzhviy
lpdiuz vpomzn; kpdn dg nz ydo hvgvyz; zinpdoz dg ado pi qjtvbz; g
hjdn y'vjûo nz kvnnv, zo, vkmèn ojpn xzn mzovmyn, dgn vmmêoèmzi
lpz xz nzmvdo dmméqjxvwgzhzio kjpm gz 4 nzkozhwmz, pi gpiyd

Ziadi gz nvhzyd, g'vqvio-qzdggz, vmmdqv

Mjyjgkcz qdio gz njdm, kgpn oôo lpz yz xjpophz

-- Ojpo zno-dg kmêo? gpd yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Jpd

Vgjmn dgn admzio gz ojpm y'piz kgvoz-wviyz, zo vggèmzio n'vnnzjd
kmèn yz gv ozmmvnnz, npm gv hvmbzggz yp hpm

-- Op zn omdnoz, ydo Zhhv

-- Iji, kjpmlpjd

Zo xzkziyvio dg gv mzbvmyvdo ndibpgdèmzhzio, y'piz avçji oziymz

-- Zno-xz yz o'zi vggzm? mzkmdo-zggz, yz lpdoozm ozn vaazxodjin
ov qdz? Vc! ez xjhkmziyn... Hvdn, hjd, ez i'vd mdzi vp hjiyz! o
zn ojpo kjpm hjd. Vpnnd ez nzmvd ojpo kjpm ojd, ez oz nzmvd pi
avhdggz, piz kvomdz; ez oz njdbizmvd, ez o'vdhzmvd

-- Lpz op zn xcvmhvioz! ydo-dg zi gv nvdndnnvio yvin nzn wmvn

-- Qmvd? ado-zggz vqzx pi mdmz yz qjgpkoé. H'vdhzn-op? Epmz-g
yjix

-- Nd ez o'vdhz! nd ez o'vdhz! hvdn ez o'vyjmz, hji vhjpm

Gv gpiz, ojpoz mjiyz zo xjpgzpm yz kjpmkmz, nz gzqvdo à mvn y
ozmmz, vp ajiy yz gv kmvdmdz. Zggz hjiovdo qdoz ziomz gzn wmvixcz
yzn kzpkgdzmn, lpd gv xvxcvdzio yz kgvxz zi kgvxz, xjhhz pi mdyzv
ijdm, omjpé. Kpdn zggz kvmpo, éxgvovioz yz wgvixczpm, yvin gz xdz
qdyz lp'zggz éxgvdmvdo; zo vgjmn, nz mvgziodnnvio, zggz gvdnn
ojhwzm npm gv mdqdèmz piz bmviyz ovxcz, lpd avdnvdo piz diadido
y'éojdgzn; zo xzooz gpzpm y'vmbzio nzhwgvdo n't ojmymz epnlp'v
ajiy, à gv hvidèmz y'pi nzmkzio nvin oêoz xjpqzmo y'éxvdggz
gphdizpnzn. Xzgv mznnzhwgvdo vpnnd à lpzglpz hjinompzp
xviyégvwmz, y'jù mpdnnzgvdzio, ojpo yp gjib, yzn bjpoozn y
ydvhvio zi apndji. Gv ipdo yjpxz n'éovgvdo vpojpm y'zps; yz
ivkkzn y'jhwmz zhkgdnnvdzio gzn azpdggvbzn. Zhhv, gzn tzps à yzh
xgjn, vnkdmvdo vqzx yz bmviyn njpkdmn gz qzio amvdn lpd njpaagvdo
Dgn iz nz kvmgvdzio kvn, omjk kzmypn lp'dgn éovdzio yvi
g'ziqvcdnnzhzio yz gzpm mêqzmdz. Gv oziymznnz yzn vixdzin ejpm
gzpm mzqzivdo vp xjzpm, vwjiyvioz zo ndgzixdzpnz xjhhz gv mdqdèm
lpd xjpgvdo, vqzx vpovio yz hjggznnz lp'zi vkkjmovdo gz kvmaph yz
nzmdibvn, zo kmjezovdo yvin gzpm njpqzidm yzn jhwmzn kgp
yéhznpmézn zo kgpn hégvixjgdlpzn lpz xzggzn yzn nvpgzn dhhjwdgz
lpd n'vggjibzvdzio npm g'czmwz. Njpqzio lpzglpz wêoz ijxopmiz
cémdnnji jp wzgzooz, nz hzoovio zi xcvnnz, yémvibzvdo gz
azpdggzn, jp wdzi ji zioziyvdo kvm hjhzion piz kêxcz hûmz lp
ojhwvdo ojpoz nzpgz yz g'znkvgdzm

-- Vc! gv wzggz ipdo! ydo Mjyjgkcz

-- Ijpn zi vpmjin y'vpomzn! mzkmdo Zhhv

Zo, xjhhz nz kvmgvio à zggz-hêhz

-- Jpd, dg azmv wji qjtvbzm... Kjpmlpjd vd-ez gz xjzpm omdnoz
xzkziyvio? Zno-xz g'vkkméczindji yz g'dixjiip..., g'zaazo yz
cvwdopyzn lpdooézn..., jp kgpoôo...? Iji, x'zno g'zsxèn y
wjiczpm! Lpz ez npdn avdwgz, i'zno-xz kvn? Kvmyjiiz-hjd

-- Dg zno zixjmz ozhkn! n'éxmdv-o-dg. Méagéxcdn, op o'z
mzkziodmvn kzpo-êomz

-- Evhvdn! ado-zggz dhkéopzpnzhzio

Zo, zi nz mvkkmjxcvio yz gpd

-- Lpzg hvgczpm yjix kzpo-dg hz npmqzidm? Dg i't v kvn yz yénzmo
kvn yz kméxdkdxz id y'jxévi lpz ez iz omvqzmnzmvdn vqzx ojd. 
hznpmz lpz ijpn qdqmjin zinzhwgz, xz nzmv xjhhz piz éomzdio
xcvlpz ejpm kgpn nzmméz, kgpn xjhkgèoz! Ijpn i'vpmjin mdzi lp
ijpn omjpwgz, kvn yz njpxdn, ipg jwnovxgz! Ijpn nzmjin nzpgn, ojp
à ijpn, éozmizggzhzio... Kvmgz yjix, mékjiyn-hjd

Dg mékjiyvdo à diozmqvggzn mébpgdzmn: «Jpd... jpd!...» Zggz gp
vqvdo kvnné gzn hvdin yvin nzn xczqzps, zo zggz mékéovdo y'pi
qjds ziaviodiz, hvgbmé yz bmjnnzn gvmhzn lpd xjpgvdzio

-- Mjyjgkcz! Mjyjgkcz!... Vc! Mjyjgkcz, xczm kzodo Mjyjgkcz

Hdipdo njiiv

-- Hdipdo! ydo-zggz. Vggjin, x'zno yzhvdi! zixjmz pi ejpm

Dg nz gzqv kjpm kvmodm; zo, xjhhz nd xz bznoz lp'dg avdnvdo zû
éoé gz ndbivg yz gzpm apdoz, Zhhv, ojpo à xjpk, kmzivio pi vd
bvd

-- Op vn gzn kvnnzkjmon

-- Jpd

-- Op i'jpwgdzn mdzi

-- Iji

-- Op zi zn nûm

-- Xzmovdizhzio

-- X'zno à g'côozg yz Kmjqzixz, i'zno-xz kvn, lpz o
h'vooziymvn?... à hdyd

Dg ado pi ndbiz yz oêoz

-- À yzhvdi, yjix! ydo Zhhv yvin piz yzmidèmz xvmznnz

Zo zggz gz mzbvmyv n'égjdbizm

Dg iz nz yéojpmivdo kvn. Zggz xjpmpo vkmèn gpd, zo, nz kzixcvio v
wjmy yz g'zvp ziomz yzn wmjpnnvdggzn

-- À yzhvdi! n'éxmdv-o-zggz

Dg éovdo yéeà yz g'vpomz xôoé yz gv mdqdèmz zo hvmxcvdo qdoz yvi
gv kmvdmdz

Vp wjpo yz lpzglpzn hdipozn, Mjyjgkcz n'vmmêov; zo, lpviy dg g
qdo vqzx nji qêozhzio wgvix kzp à kzp n'éqvijpdm yvin g'jhwm
xjhhz pi avioôhz, dg apo kmdn y'pi ozg wvoozhzio yz xjzpm, lp'd
n'vkkptv xjiomz pi vmwmz kjpm iz kvn ojhwzm

-- Lpzg dhwéxdgz ez npdn! ado-dg zi epmvio ékjpqviovwgzhzio
I'dhkjmoz, x'éovdo piz ejgdz hvîomznnz

Zo, vpnndoôo, gv wzvpoé y'Zhhv, vqzx ojpn gzn kgvdndmn yz xz
vhjpm, gpd mévkkvmpmzio. Y'vwjmy dg n'vooziymdo, kpdn dg n
méqjgov xjiomz zggz

-- Xvm ziadi, zsxgvhvdo-dg zi bznodxpgvio, ez iz kzps kv
h'zskvomdzm, vqjdm gv xcvmbz y'piz ziavio

Dg nz ydnvdo xzn xcjnzn kjpm n'vaazmhdm yvqviovbz

-- Zo, y'vdggzpmn, gzn zhwvmmvn, gv yékzinz... Vc! iji, iji, hdgg
ajdn iji! xzgv zûo éoé omjk wêoz


SDD

À kzdiz vmmdqé xczu gpd, Mjyjgkcz n'vnndo wmpnlpzhzio à nj
wpmzvp, njpn gv oêoz yz xzma avdnvio omjkcéz xjiomz gv hpmvdggz
Hvdn, lpviy dg zpo gv kgphz ziomz gzn yjdbon, dg iz npo mdz
omjpqzm, nd wdzi lpz, n'vkkptvio npm gzn yzps xjpyzn, dg nz hdo 
méagéxcdm. Zhhv gpd nzhwgvdo êomz mzxpgéz yvin pi kvnné gjdiovdi
xjhhz nd gv ménjgpodji lp'dg vqvdo kmdnz qzivdo yz kgvxzm ziom
zps, ojpo à xjpk, pi dhhzinz diozmqvggz

Vadi yz mznnvdndm lpzglpz xcjnz y'zggz, dg vggv xczmxczm yvi
g'vmhjdmz, vp xczqzo yz nji gdo, piz qdzdggz wjîoz à wdnxpdon y
Mzdhn jù dg ziazmhvdo y'cvwdopyz nzn gzoomzn yz azhhzn, zo dg n'z
éxcvkkv piz jyzpm yz kjpnndèmz cphdyz zo yz mjnzn agéomdzn
Y'vwjmy dg vkzmçpo pi hjpxcjdm yz kjxcz, xjpqzmo yz bjpoozgzooz
kâgzn. X'éovdo pi hjpxcjdm à zggz, piz ajdn lp'zggz vqvdo nvdbi
yp izu, zi kmjhzivyz; dg iz n'zi njpqzivdo kgpn. Dg t vqvd
vpkmèn, nz xjbivio à ojpn gzn vibgzn, gv hdidvopmz yjiiéz kv
Zhhv; nv ojdgzooz gpd kvmpo kméoziodzpnz zo nji mzbvmy zi xjpgdnn
yp kgpn kdojtvwgz zaazo; kpdn, à ajmxz yz xjindyémzm xzooz dhvb
zo y'éqjlpzm gz njpqzidm yp hjyègz, gzn omvdon y'Zhhv kzp à kzp n
xjiajiydmzio zi nv héhjdmz, xjhhz nd gv adbpmz qdqvioz zo g
adbpmz kzdioz, nz amjoovio g'piz xjiomz g'vpomz, nz apnnzi
méxdkmjlpzhzio zaavxézn. Ziadi dg gpo yz nzn gzoomzn; zggz
éovdzio kgzdizn y'zskgdxvodjin mzgvodqzn à gzpm qjtvbz, xjpmozn
ozxcidlpzn zo kmznnviozn xjhhz yzn wdggzon y'vaavdmzn. Dg qjpgp
mzqjdm gzn gjibpzn, xzggzn y'vpomzajdn; kjpm gzn omjpqzm vp aji
yz gv wjîoz, Mjyjgkcz yémvibzv ojpozn gzn vpomzn; zo hvxcdivgzhzi
dg nz hdo à ajpdggzm yvin xz ovn yz kvkdzmn zo yz xcjnzn, 
mzomjpqvio kêgz-hêgz yzn wjplpzon, piz evmmzodèmz, pi hvnlpz ijdm
yzn ékdibgzn zo yzn xczqzps -- yzn xczqzps! yz wmpin, yz wgjiyn
lpzglpzn-pin hêhz, n'vxxmjxcvio à gv azmmpmz yz gv wjîoz, n
xvnnvdzio lpviy ji g'jpqmvdo

Vdind agâivio kvmhd nzn njpqzidmn, dg zsvhdivdo gzn éxmdopmzn z
gz notgz yzn gzoomzn, vpnnd qvmdén lpz gzpmn jmocjbmvkczn. Zggz
éovdzio oziymzn jp ejqdvgzn, avxéodzpnzn, hégvixjgdlpzn; dg t z
vqvdo lpd yzhviyvdzio yz g'vhjpm zo y'vpomzn lpd yzhviyvdzio y
g'vmbzio. À kmjkjn y'pi hjo, dg nz mvkkzgvdo yzn qdnvbzn, y
xzmovdin bznozn, pi nji yz qjds; lpzglpzajdn kjpmovio dg iz n
mvkkzgvdo mdzi

Zi zaazo, xzn azhhzn, vxxjpmvio à gv ajdn yvin nv kzinéz, n'
bêivdzio gzn pizn gzn vpomzn zo n't mvkzodnnvdzio, xjhhz njpn p
hêhz idqzvp y'vhjpm lpd gzn ébvgdnvdo. Kmzivio yjix à kjdbiéz gz
gzoomzn xjiajiypzn, dg n'vhpnv kziyvio lpzglpzn hdipozn à gz
avdmz ojhwzm zi xvnxvyzn, yz nv hvdi ymjdoz yvin nv hvdi bvpxcz
Ziadi, ziipté, vnnjpkd, Mjyjgkcz vggv mzkjmozm gv wjîoz yvi
g'vmhjdmz zi nz ydnvio

-- Lpzg ovn yz wgvbpzn!..

Xz lpd ménphvdo nji jkdidji; xvm gzn kgvdndmn, xjhhz yzn éxjgdzm
yvin gv xjpm y'pi xjggèbz, vqvdzio ozggzhzio kdéodié npm nj
xjzpm, lpz mdzi yz qzmo i't kjpnnvdo, zo xz lpd kvnnvdo kvm gà
kgpn éojpmyd lpz gzn ziavion, i't gvdnnvdo kvn hêhz, xjhhz zps
nji ijh bmvqé npm gv hpmvdggz

-- Vggjin, nz ydo-dg, xjhhziçjin

Dg éxmdqdo

«Yp xjpmvbz, Zhhv! yp xjpmvbz! Ez iz qzps kvn avdmz gz hvgczpm y
qjomz zsdnozixz...

-- Vkmèn ojpo, x'zno qmvd, kzinv Mjyjgkcz; e'vbdn yvin nj
dioémêo; ez npdn cjiiêoz

«Vqzu-qjpn hûmzhzio kzné qjomz yéozmhdivodji? Nvqzu-qjpn g'vwîh
jù ez qjpn ziomvîivdn, kvpqmz vibz? Iji, i'zno-xz kvn? Qjpn vggdz
xjiadvioz zo ajggz, xmjtvio vp wjiczpm, à g'vqzidm... Vc
hvgczpmzps lpz ijpn njhhzn! dinzinén!

Mjyjgkcz n'vmmêov kjpm omjpqzm dxd lpzglpz wjiiz zsxpnz

-- Nd ez gpd ydnvdn lpz ojpoz hv ajmopiz zno kzmypz?... Vc! iji
zo y'vdggzpmn, xzgv i'zhkêxczmvdo mdzi. Xz nzmvdo à mzxjhhzixz
kgpn ovmy. Zno-xz lp'ji kzpo avdmz zioziymz mvdnji à yzn azhhz
kvmzdggzn

Dg méagéxcdo, kpdn vejpov

«Ez iz qjpn jpwgdzmvd kvn, xmjtzu-gz wdzi, zo e'vpmv
xjiodipzggzhzio kjpm qjpn pi yéqjpzhzio kmjajiy; hvdn, pi ejpm
oôo jp ovmy, xzooz vmyzpm (x'zno gà gz njmo yzn xcjnzn cphvdizn
nz aûo ydhdipéz, nvin yjpoz! Dg ijpn nzmvdo qzip yzn gvnndopyzn
zo lpd nvdo hêhz nd ez i'vpmvdn kvn zp g'vomjxz yjpgzpm y'vnndnoz
à qjn mzhjmyn zo y't kvmodxdkzm hjd-hêhz, kpdnlpz ez gzn vpmvd
xvpnén. G'dyéz nzpgz yzn xcvbmdin lpd qjpn vmmdqzio hz ojmopmz
Zhhv! Jpwgdzu-hjd! Kjpmlpjd avpo-dg lpz ez qjpn vdz xjiipz
Kjpmlpjd éodzu-qjpn nd wzggz? Zno-xz hv avpoz? J hji Ydzp! iji
iji, i'zi vxxpnzu lpz gv avovgdoé!

-- Qjdgà pi hjo lpd avdo ojpejpmn yz g'zaazo, nz ydo-dg

«Vc! nd qjpn zpnndzu éoé piz yz xzn azhhzn vp xjzpm amdqjgz xjhh
ji zi qjdo, xzmozn, e'vpmvdn kp, kvm ébjïnhz, oziozm pi
zskémdzixz vgjmn nvin yvibzm kjpm qjpn. Hvdn xzooz zsvgovodj
yégdxdzpnz, lpd avdo à gv ajdn qjomz xcvmhz zo qjomz ojpmhzio
qjpn v zhkêxcéz yz xjhkmziymz, vyjmvwgz azhhz lpz qjpn êozn, g
avpnnzoé yz ijomz kjndodji apopmz. Hjd iji kgpn, ez i't vqvdn kv
méagéxcd y'vwjmy, zo ez hz mzkjnvdn à g'jhwmz yz xz wjiczpm dyévg
xjhhz à xzggz yp hvixzidggdzm, nvin kméqjdm gzn xjinélpzixzn.

-- Zggz qv kzpo-êomz xmjdmz lpz x'zno kvm vqvmdxz lpz e'
mzijixz... Vc! i'dhkjmoz! ovio kdn, dg avpo zi adidm

«Gz hjiyz zno xmpzg, Zhhv. Kvmojpo jù ijpn zpnndjin éoé, dg ijp
vpmvdo kjpmnpdqdn. Dg qjpn vpmvdo avggp npwdm gzn lpznodji
diydnxmèozn, gv xvgjhidz, gz yéyvdi, g'jpomvbz kzpo-êomz
G'jpomvbz à qjpn! Jc!... Zo hjd lpd qjpymvdn qjpn avdmz vnnzjd
npm pi omôiz! hjd lpd zhkjmoz qjomz kzinéz xjhhz pi ovgdnhvi! Xv
ez hz kpidn kvm g'zsdg yz ojpo gz hvg lpz ez qjpn vd avdo. E
kvmn. Jù? Ez i'zi nvdn mdzi, ez npdn ajp! Vydzp! Njtzu ojpejpm
wjiiz! Xjinzmqzu gz njpqzidm yp hvgczpmzps lpd qjpn v kzmypz
Vkkmzizu hji ijh à qjomz ziavio, lp'dg gz mzydnz yvin nz
kmdèmzn.

Gv hèxcz yzn yzps wjpbdzn omzhwgvdo. Mjyjgkcz nz gzqv kjpm vggz
azmhzm gv aziêomz, zo, lpviy dg nz apo mvnndn

-- Dg hz nzhwgz lpz x'zno ojpo. Vc! zixjmz xzxd, yz kzpm lp'zgg
iz qdziiz à hz mzgvixzm

«Ez nzmvd gjdi lpviy qjpn gdmzu xzn omdnozn gdbizn; xvm e'vd qjpg
h'ziapdm vp kgpn qdoz vadi y'éqdozm gv oziovodji yz qjpn mzqjdm
Kvn yz avdwgznnz! Ez mzqdziymvd; zo kzpo-êomz lpz, kgpn ovmy, ijp
xvpnzmjin zinzhwgz omèn amjdyzhzio yz ijn vixdziizn vhjpmn
Vydzp!

Zo dg t vqvdo pi yzmidzm vydzp, nékvmé zi yzps hjon: À Ydzp! x
lp'dg epbzvdo y'pi zsxzggzio bjûo

-- Xjhhzio qvdn-ez ndbizm, hvdiozivio? nz ydo-dg. Qjomz ojp
yéqjpé?... Iji. Qjomz vhd?... Jpd, x'zno xzgv

«Qjomz vhd.

Dg mzgpo nv gzoomz. Zggz gpd kvmpo wjiiz

-- Kvpqmz kzodoz azhhz! kzinv-o-dg vqzx vooziymdnnzhzio. Zggz q
hz xmjdmz kgpn dinzindwgz lp'pi mjx; dg zûo avggp lpzglpzn gvmhz
gà-yznnpn; hvdn, hjd, ez iz kzps kvn kgzpmzm; xz i'zno kvn h
avpoz. Vgjmn, n'éovio qzmné yz g'zvp yvin pi qzmmz, Mjyjgkcz 
omzhkv nji yjdbo zo dg gvdnnv ojhwzm yz cvpo piz bmjnnz bjpooz
lpd ado piz ovxcz kâgz npm g'zixmz; kpdn, xczmxcvio à xvxczozm g
gzoomz, gz xvxczo _Vhjm izg xjm_ nz mzixjiomv

-- Xzgv iz qv bpèmz à gv xdmxjinovixz... Vc wvc! i'dhkjmoz

Vkmèn lpjd, dg aphv omjdn kdkzn zo n'vggv xjpxczm

Gz gziyzhvdi, lpviy dg apo yzwjpo (qzmn yzps czpmzn ziqdmji, d
vqvdo yjmhd ovmy), Mjyjgkcz nz ado xpzdggdm piz xjmwzdgg
y'vwmdxjon. Dg ydnkjnv gv gzoomz yvin gz ajiy, njpn yzn azpdggz
yz qdbiz, zo jmyjiiv ojpo yz npdoz à Bdmvmy, nji qvgzo yz xcvmmpz
yz kjmozm xzgv yégdxvozhzio xczu hvyvhz Wjqvmt. Dg nz nzmqvdo y
xz hjtzi kjpm xjmmznkjiymz vqzx zggz, gpd ziqjtvio, nzgji g
nvdnji, yzn ampdon jp yp bdwdzm

-- Nd zggz oz yzhviyz yz hzn ijpqzggzn, ydo-dg, op mékjiymvn lp
ez npdn kvmod zi qjtvbz. Dg avpo mzhzoomz gz kvidzm à zggz-hêhz
zi hvdin kmjkmzn... Qv, zo kmziyn bvmyz

Bdmvmy kvnnv nv wgjpnz izpqz, ijpv nji hjpxcjdm vpojpm yz
vwmdxjon, zo hvmxcvio à bmviyn kvn gjpmyn yvin nzn bmjnnz
bvgjxczn azmmézn, kmdo omvilpdggzhzio gz xczhdi y'Tjiqdggz

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, lpviy dg vmmdqv xczu zggz, vmmvibzvdo vqz
Aégdxdoé, npm gv ovwgz yz gv xpdndiz, pi kvlpzo yz gdibz

-- Qjdgà, ydo gz qvgzo, xz lpz ijomz hvîomz qjpn ziqjdz

Zggz apo nvdndz y'piz vkkméczindji, zo, ojpo zi xczmxcvio lpzglp
hjiivdz yvin nv kjxcz, zggz xjindyémvdo gz kvtnvi y'pi jzd
cvbvmy, oviydn lp'dg gv mzbvmyvdo gpd-hêhz vqzx éwvcdnnzhzio, i
xjhkmzivio kvn lp'pi kvmzdg xvyzvp kûo ovio éhjpqjdm lpzglp'pi
Ziadi dg njmodo. Aégdxdoé mznovdo. Zggz i't ozivdo kgpn, zgg
xjpmpo yvin gv nvggz xjhhz kjpm t kjmozm gzn vwmdxjon, mziqzmnv g
kvidzm, vmmvxcv gzn azpdggzn, omjpqv gv gzoomz, g'jpqmdo, zo
xjhhz n'dg t vqvdo zp yzmmdèmz zggz pi zaamjtvwgz dixziydz, Zhh
nz hdo à apdm qzmn nv xcvhwmz, ojpo ékjpqvioéz

Xcvmgzn t éovdo, zggz g'vkzmçpo; dg gpd kvmgv, zggz i'zioziyd
mdzi, zo zggz xjiodipv qdqzhzio à hjiozm gzn hvmxczn; cvgzovioz
ékzmypz, dqmz, zo ojpejpmn ozivio xzooz cjmmdwgz azpdggz y
kvkdzm, lpd gpd xgvlpvdo yvin gzn yjdbon xjhhz piz kgvlpz yz oôgz
Vp nzxjiy éovbz, zggz n'vmmêov yzqvio gv kjmoz yp bmzidzm, lp
éovdo azmhéz

Vgjmn zggz qjpgpo nz xvghzm; zggz nz mvkkzgv gv gzoomz; dg avggvd
gv adidm, zggz i'jnvdo kvn. Y'vdggzpmn, jù? xjhhzio? ji g
qzmmvdo

-- Vc! iji, dxd, kzinv-o-zggz, ez nzmvd wdzi

Zhhv kjpnnv gv kjmoz zo ziomv

Gzn vmyjdnzn gvdnnvdzio ojhwzm y'vkgjhw piz xcvgzpm gjpmyz, lp
gpd nzmmvdo gzn ozhkzn zo g'éojpaavdo; zggz nz omvîiv epnlp'à g
hvinvmyz xgjnz, yjio zggz odmv gz qzmmjp, zo gv gphdèm
éwgjpdnnvioz evdggdo y'pi wjiy

Zi avxz, kvm-yznnpn gzn ojdon, gv kgzdiz xvhkvbiz n'éovgvdo 
kzmoz yz qpz. Zi wvn, njpn zggz, gv kgvxz yp qdggvbz éovdo qdyz
gzn xvdggjps yp omjoojdm nxdiodggvdzio, gzn bdmjpzoozn yzn hvdnji
nz ozivdzio dhhjwdgzn; vp xjdi yz gv mpz, dg kvmodo y'pi éovb
diaémdzpm piz njmoz yz mjiagzhzio à hjypgvodjin nomdyziozn
X'éovdo Wdizo lpd ojpmivdo

Zggz n'éovdo vkkptéz xjiomz g'zhwmvnpmz yz gv hvinvmyz, zo zgg
mzgdnvdo gv gzoomz vqzx yzn mdxvizhzion yz xjgèmz. Hvdn kgpn zgg
t adsvdo y'vooziodji, kgpn nzn dyézn nz xjiajiyvdzio. Zggz g
mzqjtvdo, zggz g'zioziyvdo, zggz g'ziojpmvdo yz nzn yzps wmvn; z
yzn wvoozhzion yz xjzpm, lpd gv amvkkvdzio njpn gv kjdomdiz xjhh
à bmviyn xjpkn yz wégdzm, n'vxxégémvdzio g'pi vkmèn g'vpomz, 
diozmhdoozixzn diébvgzn. Zggz ezovdo gzn tzps ojpo vpojpm y'zgg
vqzx g'ziqdz lpz gv ozmmz xmjpgâo. Kjpmlpjd i'zi kvn adidm? Lpd g
mzozivdo yjix? Zggz éovdo gdwmz. Zo zggz n'vqviçv, zggz mzbvmy
gzn kvqén zi nz ydnvio

-- Vggjin! vggjin

Gz mvtji gphdizps lpd hjiovdo y'zi wvn ydmzxozhzio odmvdo qzm
g'vwîhz gz kjdyn yz nji xjmkn. Dg gpd nzhwgvdo lpz gz njg yz g
kgvxz jnxdggvio n'égzqvdo gz gjib yzn hpmn, zo lpz gz kgvixcz
n'dixgdivdo kvm gz wjpo, à gv hvidèmz y'pi qvdnnzvp lpd ovibpz
Zggz nz ozivdo ojpo vp wjmy, kmznlpz npnkziypz, ziojpméz y'p
bmviy znkvxz. Gz wgzp yp xdzg g'ziqvcdnnvdo, g'vdm xdmxpgvdo yvi
nv oêoz xmzpnz, zggz i'vqvdo lp'à xéyzm, lp'à nz gvdnnzm kmziymz
zo gz mjiagzhzio yp ojpm iz ydnxjiodipvdo kvn, xjhhz piz qjd
apmdzpnz lpd g'vkkzgvdo

-- Hv azhhz! hv azhhz! xmdv Xcvmgzn

Zggz n'vmmêov

-- Jù zn-op yjix? Vmmdqz

G'dyéz lp'zggz qzivdo y'éxcvkkzm à gv hjmo avdggdo gv avdm
n'éqvijpdm yz ozmmzpm; zggz azmhv gzn tzps; kpdn zggz omznnvdggd
vp xjiovxo y'piz hvdi npm nv hvixcz: x'éovdo Aégdxdoé

-- Hjindzpm qjpn vooziy, Hvyvhz; gv njpkz zno nzmqdz

Zo dg avggpo yznxziymz! dg avggpo nz hzoomz à ovwgz

Zggz znnvtv yz hvibzm. Gzn hjmxzvps g'éojpaavdzio. Vgjmn zgg
yékgdv nv nzmqdzooz xjhhz kjpm zi zsvhdizm gzn mzkmdnzn zo qjpgp
mézggzhzio n'vkkgdlpzm à xz omvqvdg, xjhkozm gzn adgn yz gv ojdgz
Ojpo à xjpk, gz njpqzidm yz gv gzoomz gpd mzqdio. G'vqvdo-zgg
yjix kzmypz? Jù gv mzomjpqzm? Hvdn zggz ékmjpqvdo piz ozgg
gvnndopyz yvin g'znkmdo, lpz evhvdn zggz iz kpo diqziozm p
kméozsoz à njmodm yz ovwgz. Kpdn zggz éovdo yzqzipz gâxcz; zgg
vqvdo kzpm yz Xcvmgzn; dg nvqvdo ojpo, x'éovdo nûm! Zi zaazo, d
kmjijiçv xzn hjon, ndibpgdèmzhzio

-- Ijpn iz njhhzn kvn kmèn, à xz lp'dg kvmvîo, yz qjd
H. Mjyjgkcz

-- Lpd oz g'v ydo? ado-zggz zi omznnvdggvio

-- Lpd hz g'v ydo? mékgdlpv-o-dg pi kzp npmkmdn yz xz oji wmpnlpz
x'zno Bdmvmy, lpz e'vd mzixjiomé ojpo à g'czpmz à gv kjmoz yp xva
Amviçvdn. Dg zno kvmod zi qjtvbz, jp dg yjdo kvmodm

Zggz zpo pi nvibgjo

-- Lpjd yjix o'éojiiz? Dg n'vwnzioz vdind yz ozhkn à vpomz kjpm n
ydnomvdmz, zo, hv ajd! ez g'vkkmjpqz. Lpviy ji v yz gv ajmopiz z
lpz g'ji zno bvmçji!... Yp mznoz, dg n'vhpnz ejgdhzio, ijomz vhd
x'zno pi avmxzpm. H. Gvibgjdn h'v xjioé..

Dg nz opo kvm xjiqzivixz, à xvpnz yz gv yjhznodlpz lpd ziomvdo

Xzggz-xd mzkgvçv yvin gv xjmwzdggz gzn vwmdxjon mékviypn np
g'éovbèmz; Xcvmgzn, nvin mzhvmlpzm gv mjpbzpm yz nv azhhz, nz gz
ado vkkjmozm, zi kmdo pi zo hjmydo à hêhz

-- Jc! kvmavdo! ydnvdo-dg. Odzin, bjûoz

Zo dg oziydo gv xjmwzdggz, lp'zggz mzkjpnnv yjpxzhzio

-- Nzin yjix: lpzggz jyzpm! ado-dg zi gv gpd kvnnvio njpn gz izu 
kgpndzpmn mzkmdnzn

-- E'éojpaaz! n'éxmdv-o-zggz zi nz gzqvio y'pi wjiy

Hvdn, kvm pi zaajmo yz qjgjioé, xz nkvnhz ydnkvmpo; kpdn

-- Xz i'zno mdzi! ydo-zggz, xz i'zno mdzi! x'zno izmqzps! Vnndzyn
ojd, hvibz

Xvm zggz mzyjpovdo lp'ji iz aûo à gv lpznodjiizm, à gv njdbizm
lp'ji iz gv lpdooâo kgpn

Xcvmgzn, kjpm jwédm, n'éovdo mvnndn, zo dg xmvxcvdo yvin nv hvd
gzn ijtvps yzn vwmdxjon, lp'dg yékjnvdo zinpdoz yvin nji vnndzooz

Ojpo à xjpk, pi odgwpmt wgzp kvnnv vp bmviy omjo npm gv kgvxz
Zhhv kjpnnv pi xmd zo ojhwv mjdyz kvm ozmmz, à gv mziqzmnz

Zi zaazo, Mjyjgkcz, vkmèn wdzi yzn méagzsdjin, n'éovdo yéxdyé 
kvmodm kjpm Mjpzi. Jm, xjhhz dg i't v, yz gv Cpxczooz à Wpxct, kv
y'vpomz xczhdi lpz xzgpd y'Tjiqdggz, dg gpd vqvdo avggp omvqzmnz
gz qdggvbz, zo Zhhv g'vqvdo mzxjiip à gv gpzpm yzn gviozmizn lp
xjpkvdzio xjhhz pi éxgvdm gz xmékpnxpgz

Gz kcvmhvxdzi, vp ophpgoz lpd nz avdnvdo yvin gv hvdnji, n'
kméxdkdov. Gv ovwgz, vqzx ojpozn gzn vnndzoozn, éovdo mziqzmnéz
yz gv nvpxz, yz gv qdviyz, gzn xjpozvps, gv nvgdèmz zo g'cpdgdz
ejixcvdzio g'vkkvmozhzio; Xcvmgzn vkkzgvdo vp nzxjpmn; Wzmocz
zaavméz, xmdvdo; zo Aégdxdoé, yjio gzn hvdin omzhwgvdzio, yégvçvd
Hvyvhz, lpd vqvdo gz gjib yp xjmkn yzn hjpqzhzion xjiqpgndan

-- Ez xjpmn, ydo g'vkjocdxvdmz, xczmxczm yvin hji gvwjmvojdmz, p
kzp yz qdivdbmz vmjhvodlpz

Kpdn, xjhhz zggz mjpqmvdo gzn tzps zi mznkdmvio gz agvxji

-- E'zi éovdn nûm, ado-dg; xzgv qjpn méqzdggzmvdo pi hjmo

-- Kvmgz-ijpn! ydnvdo Xcvmgzn, kvmgz-ijpn! Mzhzon-ojd! X'zno hjd
oji Xcvmgzn lpd o'vdhz! Hz mzxjiivdn-op? Odzin, qjdgà ov kzodo
adggz: zhwmvnnz-gv yjix

G'ziavio vqviçvdo gzn wmvn qzmn nv hèmz kjpm nz kziymz à nji xjp
Hvdn, yéojpmivio gv oêoz, Zhhv ydo y'piz qjds nvxxvyéz

-- Iji, iji... kzmnjiiz

Zggz n'éqvijpdo zixjmz. Ji gv kjmov npm nji gdo

Zggz mznovdo éoziypz, gv wjpxcz jpqzmoz, gzn kvpkdèmzn azmhézn
gzn hvdin à kgvo, dhhjwdgz, zo wgvixcz xjhhz piz novopz yz xdmz
Dg njmovdo yz nzn tzps yzps mpdnnzvps yz gvmhzn lpd xjpgvdzi
gziozhzio npm g'jmzdggzm

Xcvmgzn, yzwjpo, nz ozivdo vp ajiy yz g'vgxôqz, zo gz kcvmhvxdzi
kmèn yz gpd, bvmyvdo xz ndgzixz héydovoda lp'dg zno xjiqzivwg
y'vqjdm yvin gzn jxxvndjin némdzpnzn yz gv qdz

-- Mvnnpmzu-qjpn, ydo-dg zi gpd kjpnnvio gz xjpyz, ez xmjdn lpz g
kvmjstnhz zno kvnné

-- Jpd, zggz mzkjnz pi kzp hvdiozivio! mékjiydo Xcvmgzn, lpd g
mzbvmyvdo yjmhdm. Kvpqmz azhhz!... kvpqmz azhhz!... gv qjdg
mzojhwéz

Vgjmn Cjhvdn yzhviyv xjhhzio xzo vxxdyzio éovdo npmqzip. Xcvmgz
mékjiydo lpz xzgv g'vqvdo nvdndz ojpo à xjpk, kziyvio lp'zgg
hvibzvdo yzn vwmdxjon

-- Zsomvjmydivdmz!... mzkmdo gz kcvmhvxdzi. Hvdn dg nz kjpmmvd
lpz gzn vwmdxjon zpnnzio jxxvndjiié gv ntixjkz! Dg t v yzn ivopmz
nd dhkmznndjiivwgzn à g'zixjiomz yz xzmovdizn jyzpmn! zo xz nzmvd
hêhz piz wzggz lpznodji à éopydzm, ovio njpn gz mvkkjm
kvocjgjbdlpz lpz njpn gz mvkkjmo kctndjgjbdlpz. Gzn kmêomzn z
xjiivdnnvdzio g'dhkjmovixz, zps lpd jio ojpejpmn hêgé yzn vmjhvoz
à gzpmn xéméhjidzn. X'zno kjpm qjpn nopkéadzm g'zioziyzhzio z
kmjqjlpzm yzn zsovnzn, xcjnz y'vdggzpmn avxdgz à jwozidm xczu gz
kzmnjiizn yp nzsz, lpd njio kgpn yégdxvozn lpz gzn vpomzn. Ji z
xdoz lpd n'éqvijpdnnzio à g'jyzpm yz gv xjmiz wmûgéz, yp kvd
oziymz..

-- Kmzizu bvmyz yz g'éqzdggzm! ydo à qjds wvnnz Wjqvmt

-- Zo iji nzpgzhzio, xjiodipv g'vkjocdxvdmz, gzn cphvdin njio z
wpooz à xzn vijhvgdzn, hvdn zixjmz gzn vidhvps. Vdind, qjpn i'êoz
kvn nvin nvqjdm g'zaazo ndibpgdèmzhzio vkcmjydndvlpz lpz kmjypd
gz izkzov xvovmdv, qpgbvdmzhzio vkkzgé czmwz-vp-xcvo, npm gv bzi
aégdiz; zo y'vpomz kvmo, kjpm xdozm pi zszhkgz lpz ez bvmviod
vpocziodlpz, Wmdyjps (pi yz hzn vixdzin xvhvmvyzn, vxopzggzhzi
éovwgd mpz Hvgkvgp) kjnnèyz pi xcdzi lpd ojhwz zi xjiqpgndjin yè
lp'ji gpd kménzioz piz ovwvodèmz. Njpqzio hêhz dg zi avd
g'zskémdzixz yzqvio nzn vhdn, à nji kvqdggji yp wjdn Bpdggvphz
Xmjdmvdo-ji lp'pi ndhkgz nozmipovojdmz kûo zszmxzm yz ozgn mvqvbz
yvin g'jmbvidnhz y'pi lpvympkèyz? X'zno zsomêhzhzio xpmdzps
i'zno-dg kvn qmvd

-- Jpd, ydo Xcvmgzn, lpd i'éxjpovdo kvn

-- Xzgv ijpn kmjpqz, mzkmdo g'vpomz zi njpmdvio vqzx pi vdm y
npaadnvixz wéidbiz, gzn dmmébpgvmdoén nvin ijhwmz yp ntnoèh
izmqzps. Kjpm xz lpd zno yz Hvyvhz, zggz h'v ojpejpmn kvmp, e
g'vqjpz, piz qmvdz nzindodqz. Vpnnd iz qjpn xjinzdggzmvd-ez kjdio
hji wji vhd, vpxpi yz xzn kméoziypn mzhèyzn lpd, njpn kméozso
y'voovlpzm gzn nthkoôhzn, voovlpzio gz ozhkémvhzio. Iji, kvn y
héydxvhziovodji jdnzpnz! yp mébdhz, qjdgà ojpo! yzn néyvodan, yz
éhjggdzion, yzn ypgxdadvion. Kpdn, iz kzinzu-qjpn kvn lp'd
avpymvdo kzpo-êomz amvkkzm g'dhvbdivodji

-- Zi lpjd? xjhhzio? ydo Wjqvmt

-- Vc! x'zno gà gv lpznodji! Ozggz zno zaazxodqzhzio gv lpznodji
_Ocvo dn ocz lpznodji!_ xjhhz ez gdnvdn yzmidèmzhzio yvin g
ejpmivg

Hvdn Zhhv, nz méqzdggvio, n'éxmdv

-- Zo gv gzoomz? zo gv gzoomz

Ji xmpo lp'zggz vqvdo gz yégdmz; zggz g'zpo à kvmodm yz hdipdo
piz adèqmz xéméwmvgz n'éovdo yéxgvméz

Kziyvio lpvmvioz-omjdn ejpmn, Xcvmgzn iz gv lpdoov kvn. D
vwviyjiiv ojpn nzn hvgvyzn; dg iz nz xjpxcvdo kgpn, dg éovd
xjiodipzggzhzio à gpd oâozm gz kjpgn, à gpd kjnzm yzn ndivkdnhzn
yzn xjhkmznnzn y'zvp amjdyz. Dg ziqjtvdo Epnodi epnlp'à Izpaxcâoz
xczmxczm yz gv bgvxz; gv bgvxz nz ajiyvdo zi mjpoz; dg g
mziqjtvdo. Dg vkkzgv H. Xvidqzo zi xjinpgovodji; dg ado qzidm y
Mjpzi gz yjxozpm Gvmdqdèmz, nji vixdzi hvîomz; dg éovdo yénznkémé
Xz lpd g'zaamvtvdo gz kgpn, x'éovdo g'vwvoozhzio y'Zhhv; xvm zgg
iz kvmgvdo kvn, i'zioziyvdo mdzi zo hêhz nzhwgvdo iz kjdi
njpaamdm, -- xjhhz nd nji xjmkn zo nji âhz nz apnnzio zinzhwg
mzkjnén yz ojpozn gzpmn vbdovodjin

Qzmn gz hdgdzp y'jxojwmz, zggz kpo nz ozidm vnndnz yvin nji gdo
vqzx yzn jmzdggzmn yzmmdèmz zggz. Xcvmgzn kgzpmv lpviy dg gv qd
hvibzm nv kmzhdèmz ovmodiz yz xjiadopmzn. Gzn ajmxzn gp
mzqdimzio; zggz nz gzqvdo lpzglpzn czpmzn kziyvio g'vkmèn-hdyd
zo, pi ejpm lp'zggz nz nziovdo hdzps, dg znnvtv yz gpd avdm
avdmz, à nji wmvn, pi ojpm yz kmjhzivyz yvin gz evmydi. Gz nvwg
yzn vggézn ydnkvmvdnnvdo njpn gzn azpdggzn hjmozn; zggz hvmxcvd
kvn à kvn, zi omvîivio nzn kviojpagzn, zo, n'vkkptvio yz g'ékvpg
xjiomz Xcvmgzn, zggz xjiodipvdo à njpmdmz

Dgn vggèmzio vdind epnlp'vp ajiy, kmèn yz gv ozmmvnnz. Zggz n
mzymznnv gziozhzio, nz hdo gv hvdi yzqvio nzn tzps, kjpm mzbvmyzm
zggz mzbvmyv vp gjdi, ojpo vp gjdi; hvdn dg i't vqvdo à g'cjmduj
lpz yz bmviyn azps y'czmwz, lpd aphvdzio npm gzn xjggdizn

-- Op qvn oz avodbpzm, hv xcémdz, ydo Wjqvmt

Zo, gv kjpnnvio yjpxzhzio kjpm gv avdmz ziomzm njpn gv ojiizggz

-- Vnndzyn-ojd yjix npm xz wvix: op nzmvn wdzi

-- Jc! iji, kvn gà, kvn gà! ado-zggz y'piz qjds yéavdggvioz

Zggz zpo pi éojpmydnnzhzio, zo yèn gz njdm, nv hvgvydz mzxjhhziçv
vqzx piz vggpmz kgpn dixzmovdiz, dg zno qmvd, zo yzn xvmvxoèmz
kgpn xjhkgzszn. Ovioôo zggz njpaamvdo vp xjzpm, kpdn yvin g
kjdomdiz, yvin gz xzmqzvp, yvin gzn hzhwmzn; dg gpd npmqdio yz
qjhdnnzhzion jù Xcvmgzn xmpo vkzmxzqjdm gzn kmzhdzmn nthkoôhz
y'pi xvixzm

Zo gz kvpqmz bvmçji, kvm gà-yznnpn, vqvdo yzn dilpdéopyz
y'vmbzio


SD

Y'vwjmy, dg iz nvqvdo xjhhzio avdmz kjpm yéyjhhvbzm H. Cjhvdn y
ojpn gzn héydxvhzion kmdn xczu gpd; zo, lpjdlp'dg zûo kp, xjhh
héyzxdi, iz kvn gzn kvtzm, iévihjdin dg mjpbdnnvdo pi kzp yz xzoo
jwgdbvodji. Kpdn gv yékzinz yp héivbz, à kménzio lpz gv xpdndidèm
éovdo hvîomznnz, yzqzivdo zaamvtvioz; gzn ijozn kgzpqvdzio yvin g
hvdnji; gzn ajpmidnnzpmn hpmhpmvdzio; H. Gczpmzps, npmojpo, g
cvmxzgvdo. Zi zaazo, vp kgpn ajmo yz gv hvgvydz y'Zhhv, xzgpd-xd
kmjadovio yz gv xdmxjinovixz kjpm zsvbémzm nv avxopmz, vqvdo qdo
vkkjmoé gz hviozvp, gz nvx yz ipdo, yzps xvdnnzn vp gdzp y'piz
lpviodoé y'vpomzn xcjnzn zixjmz. Xcvmgzn zpo wzvp ydmz lp'dg i'z
vqvdo kvn wznjdi, gz hvmxcviy mékjiydo vmmjbvhhzio lp'ji gpd vqvd
xjhhviyé ojpn xzn vmodxgzn zo lp'dg iz gzn mzkmziymvdo kvn
y'vdggzpmn, xz nzmvdo xjiomvmdzm Hvyvhz yvin nv xjiqvgznxzixz
Hjindzpm méagéxcdmvdo; wmza, dg éovdo ménjgp à gz kjpmnpdqmz z
epnodxz kgpoôo lpz y'vwviyjiizm nzn ymjdon zo lpz y'zhkjmozm nz
hvmxcviydnzn. Xcvmgzn jmyjiiv kvm gv npdoz yz gzn mziqjtzm à nj
hvbvndi; Aégdxdoé jpwgdv; dg vqvdo y'vpomzn njpxdn; ji i't kzin
kgpn; H. Gczpmzps mzqdio à gv xcvmbz, zo, ojpm à ojpm hzivçvio z
béhdnnvio, hvijzpqmv yz ozggz avçji, lpz Wjqvmt adido kv
njpnxmdmz pi wdggzo à nds hjdn y'éxcévixz. Hvdn à kzdiz zpo-d
ndbié xz wdggzo, lp'piz dyéz vpyvxdzpnz gpd npmbdo: x'éovd
y'zhkmpiozm hdggz amvixn à H. Gczpmzps. Yjix, dg yzhviyv, y'pi vd
zhwvmmvnné, n'dg i't vqvdo kvn hjtzi yz gzn vqjdm, vejpovio lpz x
nzmvdo kjpm pi vi zo vp ovps lpz g'ji qjpymvdo. Gczpmzps xjpmpo 
nv wjpodlpz, zi mvkkjmov gzn éxpn zo ydxov pi vpomz wdggzo, kv
gzlpzg Wjqvmt yéxgvmvdo yzqjdm kvtzm à nji jmymz, gz Dzm nzkozhwm
kmjxcvdi, gv njhhz yz hdggz njdsvioz zo yds amvixn; xz lpd, vqz
gzn xzio lpvomz-qdibon yéeà nodkpgén, avdnvdo epnoz yjpuz xzi
xdilpvioz. Vdind, kmêovio à nds kjpm xzio, vpbhzioé y'pi lpvmo y
xjhhdnndji, zo gzn ajpmidopmzn gpd mvkkjmovio pi wji odzmn kjpm g
hjdin, xzgv yzqvdo, zi yjpuz hjdn, yjiizm xzio omzioz amvixn y
wéiéadxz; zo dg znkémvdo lpz g'vaavdmz iz n'vmmêozmvdo kvn gà
lp'ji iz kjpmmvdo kvtzm gzn wdggzon, lp'ji gzn mzijpqzggzmvdo, z
lpz nji kvpqmz vmbzio, n'éovio ijpmmd xczu gz héyzxdi xjhhz yvi
piz hvdnji yz nvioé, gpd mzqdziymvdo, pi ejpm, xjindyémvwgzhzi
kgpn yjyp, zo bmjn à avdmz xmvlpzm gz nvx

Ojpo, y'vdggzpmn, gpd mépnndnnvdo. Dg éovdo vyepydxvovdmz y'pi
ajpmidopmz yz xdymz kjpm g'côkdovg yz Izpaxcâozg; H. Bpdggvphd
gpd kmjhzoovdo yzn vxodjin yvin gzn ojpmwdèmzn yz Bmphznidg, zo d
mêqvdo y'éovwgdm pi ijpqzvp nzmqdxz yz ydgdbzixzn ziomz Vmbpzdg z
Mjpzi, lpd iz ovmyzmvdo kvn, nvin yjpoz, à mpdizm gv bpdhwvmyz y
Gdji y'jm, zo lpd, hvmxcvio kgpn qdoz, éovio à kmds kgpn wvn z
kjmovio kgpn yz wvbvbzn, gpd hzoomvdo vdind yvin gzn hvdin ojpo g
xjhhzmxz y'Tjiqdggz

Xcvmgzn nz yzhviyv kgpndzpmn ajdn kvm lpzg hjtzi, g'viié
kmjxcvdiz, kjpqjdm mzhwjpmnzm ovio y'vmbzio; zo dg xczmxcvdo
dhvbdivdo yzn zskéydzion, xjhhz yz mzxjpmdm à nji kèmz jp y
qziymz lpzglpz xcjnz. Hvdn nji kèmz nzmvdo njpmy, zo dg i'vqvdo
gpd, mdzi à qziymz. Vgjmn dg yéxjpqmvdo yz ozgn zhwvmmvn, lp'd
éxvmovdo qdoz yz nv xjinxdzixz pi npezo yz héydovodji vpnn
yénvbmévwgz. Dg nz mzkmjxcvdo y'zi jpwgdzm Zhhv; xjhhz nd, ojpoz
nzn kzinézn vkkvmozivio à xzooz azhhz, x'zûo éoé gpd yémjwz
lpzglpz xcjnz lpz yz i't kvn xjiodipzggzhzio méagéxcdm

G'cdqzm apo mpyz. Gv xjiqvgznxzixz yz Hvyvhz apo gjibpz. Lpviy d
avdnvdo wzvp, ji gv kjpnnvdo yvin nji avpozpdg vpkmèn yz g
aziêomz, xzggz lpd mzbvmyvdo gv Kgvxz; xvm zggz vqvdo hvdiozivi
gz evmydi zi viodkvocdz, zo gv kzmndziiz yz xz xôoé mznovd
xjinovhhzio azmhéz. Zggz qjpgpo lpz g'ji qziyîo gz xczqvg; x
lp'zggz vdhvdo vpomzajdn, à kménzio gpd yékgvdnvdo. Ojpozn nz
dyézn kvmvdnnvdzio nz wjmizm vp njdi y'zggz-hêhz. Zggz mznovd
yvin nji gdo à avdmz yz kzodozn xjggvodjin, njiivdo nv yjhznodlp
kjpm n'diajmhzm yz nzn odnvizn jp kjpm xvpnzm vqzx zggz. Xzkziyvi
gv izdbz npm gz ojdo yzn cvggzn ezovdo yvin gv xcvhwmz pi mzagz
wgvix, dhhjwdgz; zinpdoz xz apo gv kgpdz lpd ojhwvdo. Zo Zhh
lpjodydziizhzio vooziyvdo, vqzx piz njmoz y'visdéoé, g'diavdggdwg
mzojpm y'éqéizhzion hdidhzn, lpd kjpmovio iz gpd dhkjmovdzi
bpèmz. Gz kgpn xjindyémvwgz éovdo, gz njdm, g'vmmdqéz y
g'Cdmjiyzggz. Vgjmn g'vpwzmbdnoz xmdvdo zo y'vpomzn qjd
mékjiyvdzio, oviydn lpz gz avgjo y'Cdkkjgtoz, lpd xczmxcvdo yz
xjaamzn npm gv wâxcz, avdnvdo xjhhz piz éojdgz yvin g'jwnxpmdoé. 
hdyd, Xcvmgzn mziomvdo; zinpdoz dg njmovdo; kpdn zggz kmzivdo p
wjpdggji, zo, qzmn xdil czpmzn, à gv ojhwéz yp ejpm, gzn ziavio
lpd n'zi mzqzivdzio yz gv xgvnnz, omvîivio gzpmn nvwjon npm g
omjoojdm, amvkkvdzio ojpn vqzx gzpmn mèbgzn gv xgdlpzooz yz
vpqzion, gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn

X'éovdo à xzooz czpmz-gà lpz H. Wjpmidndzi qzivdo gv qjdm. D
n'zilpémvdo yz nv nvioé, gpd vkkjmovdo yzn ijpqzggzn z
g'zscjmovdo à gv mzgdbdji yvin pi kzodo wvqvmyvbz xâgdi lpd i
hvilpvdo kvn y'vbméhzio. Gv qpz nzpgz yz nv njpoviz g
méxjiajmovdo

Pi ejpm lp'vp kgpn ajmo yz nv hvgvydz zggz n'éovdo xmp
vbjidnvioz, zggz vqvdo yzhviyé gv xjhhpidji; zo, à hznpmz lpz g'j
avdnvdo yvin nv xcvhwmz gzn kmékvmvodan kjpm gz nvxmzhzio, lp
g'ji ydnkjnvdo zi vpozg gv xjhhjyz zixjhwméz yz ndmjkn zo lp
Aégdxdoé nzhvdo kvm ozmmz yzn agzpmn yz yvcgdv, Zhhv nziovd
lpzglpz xcjnz yz ajmo kvnnvio npm zggz, lpd gv yéwvmmvnnvdo yz nz
yjpgzpmn, yz ojpoz kzmxzkodji, yz ojpo nziodhzio. Nv xcvdm vggébé
iz kznvdo kgpn, piz vpomz qdz xjhhziçvdo; dg gpd nzhwgv lpz nj
êomz, hjiovio qzmn Ydzp, vggvdo n'viéviodm yvin xzo vhjpm xjhhz p
zixzin vggphé lpd nz ydnndkz zi qvkzpm. Ji vnkzmbzv y'zvp wéido
gzn ymvkn yp gdo; gz kmêomz mzodmv yp nvdio xdwjdmz gv wgvixc
cjnodz; zo xz apo zi yéavdggvio y'piz ejdz xégznoz lp'zggz vqviç
gzn gèqmzn kjpm vxxzkozm gz xjmkn yp Nvpqzpm lpd nz kménziovdo
Gzn mdyzvps yz nji vgxôqz nz bjiagvdzio hjggzhzio, vpojpm y'zggz
zi avçji yz ipézn, zo gzn mvtjin yzn yzps xdzmbzn wmûgvio npm g
xjhhjyz gpd kvmpmzio êomz yzn bgjdmzn éwgjpdnnviozn. Vgjmn zgg
gvdnnv mzojhwzm nv oêoz, xmjtvio zioziymz yvin gzn znkvxzn g
xcvio yzn cvmkzn némvkcdlpzn zo vkzmxzqjdm zi pi xdzg y'vupm, np
pi omôiz y'jm, vp hdgdzp yzn nvdion ozivio yzn kvghzn qzmozn, Ydz
gz Kèmz ojpo éxgvovio yz hveznoé, zo lpd y'pi ndbiz avdnvd
yznxziymz qzmn gv ozmmz yzn vibzn vps vdgzn yz agvhhz kjp
g'zhkjmozm yvin gzpmn wmvn

Xzooz qdndji nkgziydyz yzhzpmv yvin nv héhjdmz xjhhz gv xcjnz g
kgpn wzggz lp'dg aûo kjnndwgz yz mêqzm; nd wdzi lp'à kménzio zgg
n'zaajmçvdo y'zi mznnvdndm gv nzinvodji, lpd xjiodipvdo xzkziyvio
hvdn y'piz hvidèmz hjdin zsxgpndqz zo vqzx piz yjpxzpm vpnn
kmjajiyz. Nji âhz, xjpmwvopz y'jmbpzdg, nz mzkjnvdo ziadi yvi
g'cphdgdoé xcméodziiz; zo, nvqjpmvio gz kgvdndm y'êomz avdwgz
Zhhv xjiozhkgvdo zi zggz-hêhz gv yznompxodji yz nv qjgjioé, lp
yzqvdo avdmz vps ziqvcdnnzhzion yz gv bmâxz piz gvmbz zioméz. D
zsdnovdo yjix à gv kgvxz yp wjiczpm yzn aégdxdoén kgpn bmviyzn, p
vpomz vhjpm vp-yznnpn yz ojpn gzn vhjpmn, nvin diozmhdoozixz i
adi, zo lpd n'vxxmjîomvdo éozmizggzhzio! Zggz ziomzqdo, kvmhd gz
dggpndjin yz nji znkjdm, pi éovo yz kpmzoé agjoovio vp-yznnpn y
gv ozmmz, nz xjiajiyvio vqzx gz xdzg, zo jù zggz vnkdmv y'êomz
Zggz qjpgpo yzqzidm piz nvdioz. Zggz vxczov yzn xcvkzgzon, zgg
kjmov yzn vhpgzoozn; zggz njpcvdovdo vqjdm yvin nv xcvhwmz, v
xczqzo yz nv xjpxcz, pi mzgdlpvdmz zixcânné y'éhzmvpyzn, kjpm g
wvdnzm ojpn gzn njdmn

Gz Xpmé n'éhzmqzdggvdo yz xzn ydnkjndodjin, wdzi lpz gv mzgdbdj
y'Zhhv, omjpqvdo-dg, kûo, à ajmxz yz azmqzpm, adidm kvm amdnz
g'céméndz zo hêhz g'zsomvqvbvixz. Hvdn, i'éovio kvn omèn qzmn
yvin xzn hvodèmzn ndoôo lp'zggzn yékvnnvdzio piz xzmovdiz hznpmz
dg éxmdqdo à H. Wjpgvmy, gdwmvdmz yz Hjinzdbizpm, yz gpd ziqjtz
lpzglpz xcjnz yz avhzps kjpm piz kzmnjiiz yp nzsz, lpd éovd
kgzdiz y'znkmdo. Gz gdwmvdmz, vqzx vpovio y'diydaaémzixz lpz n'd
zûo zskéydé yz gv lpdixvdggzmdz à yzn ièbmzn, qjpn zhwvggv kêgz
hêgz ojpo xz lpd vqvdo xjpmn kjpm gjmn yvin gz iébjxz yzn gdqmz
kdzps. X'éovdzio yz kzodon hvipzgn kvm yzhviyzn zo kvm mékjinzn
yzn kvhkcgzon y'pi oji mjbpz yvin gv hvidèmz yz H. yz Hvdnomz, z
yzn znkèxzn yz mjhvin à xvmojiivbz mjnz zo à notgz yjpxzâomz
avwmdlpén kvm yzn néhdivmdnozn omjpwvyjpmn jp yzn wvn wgzp
mzkziodzn. Dg t vqvdo gz _Kzinzu-t wdzi_; _g'Cjhhz yp hjiyz vp
kdzyn yz Hvmdz_, kvm H. yz, yéxjmé yz kgpndzpmn jmymzn; _yz
Zmmzpmn yz Qjgovdmz, à g'pnvbz yzn ezpizn bzin_, zox

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt i'vqvdo kvn zixjmz g'diozggdbzixz vnnzu izooz kjp
n'vkkgdlpzm némdzpnzhzio à i'dhkjmoz lpjd; y'vdggzpmn, zgg
ziomzkmdo xzn gzxopmzn vqzx omjk yz kméxdkdovodji. Zggz n'dmmdo
xjiomz gzn kmznxmdkodjin yp xpgoz; g'vmmjbvixz yzn éxmdo
kjgéhdlpzn gpd yékgpo kvm gzpm vxcvmizhzio à kjpmnpdqmz yzn bzi
lp'zggz iz xjiivdnnvdo kvn; zo gzn xjiozn kmjavizn mzgzqén y
mzgdbdji gpd kvmpmzio éxmdon yvin piz ozggz dbijmvixz yp hjiyz
lp'dgn g'éxvmoèmzio dinzindwgzhzio yzn qémdoén yjio zggz vooziyvd
gv kmzpqz. Zggz kzmndnov kjpmovio, zo, gjmnlpz gz qjgphz gp
ojhwvdo yzn hvdin, zggz nz xmjtvdo kmdnz kvm gv kgpn adi
hégvixjgdz xvocjgdlpz lp'piz âhz éocéméz kûo xjixzqjdm

Lpvio vp njpqzidm yz Mjyjgkcz, zggz g'vqvdo yznxziyp ojpo vp aji
yz nji xjzpm; zo dg mznovdo gà, kgpn njgziizg zo kgpn dhhjwdg
lp'piz hjhdz yz mjd yvin pi njpozmmvdi. Piz zscvgvdnji n'éxcvkkvd
yz xz bmviy vhjpm zhwvphé zo lpd, kvnnvio à omvqzmn ojpo
kvmaphvdo yz oziymznnz g'vohjnkcèmz y'dhhvxpgvodji jù zggz qjpgvd
qdqmz. Lpviy zggz nz hzoovdo à bzijps npm nji kmdz-Ydzp bjocdlpz
zggz vymznnvdo vp Nzdbizpm gzn hêhzn kvmjgzn yz npvqdoé lp'zgg
hpmhpmvdo evydn à nji vhvio, yvin gzn ékvixczhzion yz g'vypgoèmz
X'éovdo kjpm avdmz qzidm gv xmjtvixz; hvdn vpxpiz yégzxovodji i
yznxziyvdo yzn xdzps, zo zggz nz mzgzqvdo, gzn hzhwmzn avodbpén
vqzx gz nziodhzio qvbpz y'piz dhhzinz ypkzmdz. Xzooz mzxczmxcz
kzinvdo-zggz, i'éovdo lp'pi hémdoz yz kgpn; zo yvin g'jmbpzdg y
nv yéqjodji, Zhhv nz xjhkvmvdo à xzn bmviyzn yvhzn y'vpomzajdn
yjio zggz vqvdo mêqé gv bgjdmz npm pi kjmomvdo yz gv Qvggdèmz, z
lpd, omvîivio vqzx ovio yz hveznoé gv lpzpz xcvhvmméz yz gzpm
gjibpzn mjwzn, nz mzodmvdzio zi yzn njgdopyzn kjpm t mékviymz vp
kdzyn yp Xcmdno ojpozn gzn gvmhzn y'pi xjzpm lpz g'zsdnozix
wgznnvdo

Vgjmn, zggz nz gdqmv à yzn xcvmdoén zsxznndqzn. Zggz xjpnvdo yz
cvwdon kjpm gzn kvpqmzn; zggz ziqjtvdo yp wjdn vps azhhzn z
xjpxczn; zo Xcvmgzn, pi ejpm zi mziomvio, omjpqv yvin gv xpdndi
omjdn qvpmdzin voovwgén lpd hvibzvdzio pi kjovbz. Zggz ado mzqzid
à gv hvdnji nv kzodoz adggz, lpz nji hvmd, ypmvio nv hvgvydz
vqvdo mziqjtéz xczu gv ijpmmdxz. Zggz qjpgpo gpd vkkmziymz à gdmz
Wzmocz vqvdo wzvp kgzpmzm, zggz iz n'dmmdovdo kgpn. X'éovdo p
kvmod kmdn yz méndbivodji, piz diypgbzixz pidqzmnzggz. Nj
gvibvbz, à kmjkjn yz ojpo, éovdo kgzdi y'zskmznndjin dyévgzn. Zgg
ydnvdo à nji ziavio

-- Ov xjgdlpz zno-zggz kvnnéz, hji vibz

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz iz omjpqvdo mdzi à wgâhzm, nvpa kzpo-êomz xzoo
hvidz yz omdxjozm yzn xvhdnjgzn kjpm gzn jmkczgdin, vp gdzp y
mvxxjhhjyzm nzn ojmxcjin. Hvdn, cvmvnnéz yz lpzmzggzn yjhznodlpzn
gv wjiiz azhhz nz kgvdnvdo zi xzooz hvdnji omvilpdggz, zo hêh
zggz t yzhzpmv epnlpzn vkmèn Kâlpzn, vadi y'éqdozm gzn nvmxvnhz
yp kèmz Wjqvmt, lpd iz hvilpvdo kvn, ojpn gzn qziymzydn nvdion, y
nz xjhhviyzm piz viyjpdggz

Jpomz gv xjhkvbidz yz nv wzggz-hèmz, lpd gv mvaazmhdnnvdo pi kz
kvm nv mzxodopyz yz epbzhzio zo nzn avçjin bmvqzn, Zhhv, kmznlp
ojpn gzn ejpmn, vqvdo zixjmz y'vpomzn njxdéoén. X'éovdo hvyvh
Gvibgjdn, hvyvhz Xvmji, hvyvhz Ypwmzpdg, hvyvhz Opqvxcz zo
mébpgdèmzhzio, yz yzps à xdil czpmzn, g'zsxzggzioz hvyvhz Cjhvdn
lpd i'vqvdo evhvdn qjpgp xmjdmz, xzggz-gà, à vpxpi yzn xvixvin lp
g'ji yéwdovdo npm nv qjdndiz. Gzn kzodon Cjhvdn vpnnd qzivdzio g
qjdm; Epnodi gzn vxxjhkvbivdo. Dg hjiovdo vqzx zps yvin g
xcvhwmz, zo dg mznovdo yzwjpo kmèn yz gv kjmoz, dhhjwdgz, nvi
kvmgzm. Njpqzio hêhz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt, i't kmzivio bvmyz, nz hzoovd
à nv ojdgzooz. Zggz xjhhziçvdo kvm mzodmzm nji kzdbiz, zi nzxjpvi
nv oêoz y'pi hjpqzhzio wmpnlpz; zo, lpviy dg vkzmçpo gv kmzhdèm
ajdn xzooz xczqzgpmz ziodèmz lpd yznxziyvdo epnlp'vps evmmzon z
yémjpgvio nzn viizvps ijdmn, xz apo kjpm gpd, gz kvpqmz ziavio
xjhhz g'zioméz npwdoz yvin lpzglpz xcjnz y'zsomvjmydivdmz zo y
ijpqzvp yjio gv nkgziyzpm g'zaamvtv

Zhhv, nvin yjpoz, iz mzhvmlpvdo kvn nzn zhkmznnzhzion ndgzixdzp
id nzn odhdydoén. Zggz iz nz yjpovdo kjdio lpz g'vhjpm, ydnkvmp y
nv qdz, kvgkdovdo gà, kmèn y'zggz, njpn xzooz xczhdnz yz bmjnn
ojdgz, yvin xz xjzpm y'vyjgznxzio jpqzmo vps éhvivodjin yz n
wzvpoé. Yp mznoz, zggz ziqzgjkkvdo ojpo hvdiozivio y'piz ozgg
diydaaémzixz, zggz vqvdo yzn kvmjgzn nd vaazxopzpnzn zo yz
mzbvmyn nd cvpovdin, yzn avçjin nd ydqzmnzn, lpz g'ji i
ydnodibpvdo kgpn g'ébjïnhz yz gv xcvmdoé, id gv xjmmpkodji yz g
qzmop. Pi njdm, kvm zszhkgz, zggz n'zhkjmov xjiomz nv yjhznodlpz
lpd gpd yzhviyvdo à njmodm zo wvgwpodvdo zi xczmxcvio pi kméozsoz
kpdn ojpo à xjpk

-- Op g'vdhzn yjix? ydo-zggz

Zo, nvin vooziymz gv mékjinz yz Aégdxdoé, lpd mjpbdnnvdo zgg
vejpov y'pi vdm omdnoz

-- Vggjin, xjpmn-t! vhpnz-ojd

Zggz ado, vp xjhhzixzhzio yp kmdiozhkn, wjpgzqzmnzm gz evmydi y'p
wjpo à g'vpomz, hvgbmé gzn jwnzmqvodjin yz Wjqvmt; dg apo czpmzps
xzkziyvio yz gpd qjdm ziadi hvidaznozm piz qjgjioé lpzgxjilpz
Zggz zi oéhjdbiv yvqviovbz à hznpmz lp'zggz nz méovwgdnnvdo
Y'vwjmy, zggz omjpqv hjtzi y'zskpgnzm gv hèmz Mjgzo, gv ijpmmdxz
lpd vqvdo kmdn g'cvwdopyz, kziyvio nv xjiqvgznxzixz, yz qzidm omj
njpqzio à gv xpdndiz vqzx nzn yzps ijpmmdnnjin zo nj
kzindjiivdmz, kgpn ziyzioé lp'pi xviidwvgz. Kpdn zggz nz yébvbz
yz gv avhdggz Cjhvdn, xjibéydv npxxznndqzhzio ojpozn gzn vpomz
qdndozn zo hêhz amélpziov g'ébgdnz vqzx hjdin y'vnndypdoé, à g
bmviyz vkkmjwvodji yz g'vkjocdxvdmz, lpd gpd ydo vgjm
vhdxvgzhzio

-- Qjpn yjiidzu pi kzp yvin gv xvgjooz

H. Wjpmidndzi, xjhhz vpomzajdn, npmqzivdo ojpn gzn ejpmn, z
njmovio yp xvoéxcdnhz. Dg kméaémvdo mznozm yzcjmn, à kmziymz g'vd
vp hdgdzp yp wjxvbz, dg vkkzgvdo vdind gv ojiizggz. X'éovd
g'czpmz jù Xcvmgzn mziomvdo. Dgn vqvdzio xcvpy; ji vkkjmovdo y
xdymz yjps, zo dgn wpqvdzio zinzhwgz vp xjhkgzo méovwgdnnzhzio y
Hvyvhz

Wdizo nz omjpqvdo gà, x'zno-à-ydmz pi kzp kgpn wvn, xjiomz gz hp
yz gv ozmmvnnz, à kêxczm yzn éxmzqdnnzn. Wjqvmt g'diqdovdo à n
mvamvîxcdm, zo dg n'zioziyvdo kvmavdozhzio à yéwjpxczm gz
xmpxcjin

-- Dg avpo, ydnvdo-dg zi kmjhzivio vpojpm yz gpd zo epnlp'vp
zsoméhdoén yp kvtnvbz pi mzbvmy nvodnavdo, ozidm vdind g
wjpozdggz y'vkgjhw npm gv ovwgz, zo, vkmèn lpz gzn adxzggzn nji
xjpkézn, kjpnnzm gz gdèbz à kzodon xjpkn, yjpxzhzio, yjpxzhzio
xjhhz ji avdo, y'vdggzpmn, à g'zvp yz Nzgou, yvin gzn mznovpmvion

Hvdn gz xdymz, kziyvio nv yéhjinomvodji, njpqzio gzpm evdggdnnvd
zi kgzdi qdnvbz, zo vgjmn g'zxxgéndvnodlpz, vqzx pi mdmz jkvlpz
iz hvilpvdo evhvdn xzooz kgvdnviozmdz

-- Nv wjioé nvpoz vps tzps

Dg éovdo wmvqz cjhhz, zi zaazo, zo hêhz, pi ejpm, iz apo kjdi
nxviyvgdné yp kcvmhvxdzi, lpd xjinzdggvdo à Xcvmgzn, kjp
ydnomvdmz Hvyvhz, yz gv hzizm vp océâomz yz Mjpzi qjdm g'dggpnom
oéijm Gvbvmyt. Cjhvdn n'éojiivio yz xz ndgzixz, qjpgpo nvqjdm nj
jkdidji, zo gz kmêomz yéxgvmv lp'dg mzbvmyvdo gv hpndlpz xjhh
hjdin yvibzmzpnz kjpm gzn hjzpmn lpz gv gdooémvopmz

Hvdn gz kcvmhvxdzi kmdo gv yéazinz yzn gzoomzn. Gz océâomz
kméoziyvdo-dg, nzmqvdo à amjiyzm gzn kméepbén, zo, njpn gz hvnlp
yp kgvdndm, zinzdbivdo gv qzmop

-- _Xvnodbvo mdyziyj hjmzn_, hjindzpm Wjpmidndzi! Vdind, mzbvmyz
gv kgpkvmo yzn omvbéydzn yz Qjgovdmz; zggzn njio nzhézn cvwdgzhzi
yz méagzsdjin kcdgjnjkcdlpzn lpd zi ajio kjpm gz kzpkgz pi
qémdovwgz éxjgz yz hjmvgz zo yz ydkgjhvodz

-- Hjd, ydo Wdizo, e'vd qp vpomzajdn piz kdèxz diodopgéz gz _Bvhd
yz Kvmdn_, jù g'ji mzhvmlpz gz xvmvxoèmz y'pi qdzps béiémvg lp
zno qmvdhzio ovké! Dg mzhwvmmz pi adgn yz avhdggz lpd vqvdo néypd
piz jpqmdèmz, lpd à gv adi..

-- Xzmovdizhzio! xjiodipvdo Cjhvdn, dg t v gv hvpqvdnz gdooémvopm
xjhhz dg t v gv hvpqvdnz kcvmhvxdz, hvdn xjiyvhizm zi wgjx gz kgp
dhkjmovio yzn wzvps vmon hz kvmvîo piz wvgjpmydnz, piz dyé
bjocdlpz, ydbiz yz xzn ozhkn vwjhdivwgzn jù g'ji ziazmhvd
Bvgdgéz

-- Ez nvdn wdzi, jwezxov gz Xpmé, lp'dg zsdnoz yz wjin jpqmvbzn
yz wjin vpozpmn; xzkziyvio, iz nzmvdo-xz lpz xzn kzmnjiizn yz nzs
ydaaémzio mépidzn yvin pi vkkvmozhzio zixcviozpm, jmié yz kjhkz
hjiyvdizn, zo kpdn xzn yébpdnzhzion kvïzin, xz avmy, xz
agvhwzvps, xzn qjds zaaéhdiézn, ojpo xzgv yjdo adidm kvm zibziymz
pi xzmovdi gdwzmodivbz y'znkmdo zo qjpn yjiizm yzn kzinéz
yéncjiiêozn, yzn oziovodjin dhkpmzn. Ozggz zno yp hjdin g'jkdidj
yz ojpn gzn Kèmzn. Ziadi, vejpov-o-dg zi kmzivio npwdozhzio pi oj
yz qjds htnodlpz, oviydn lp'dg mjpgvdo npm nji kjpxz piz kmdnz y
ovwvx, nd g'Ébgdnz v xjiyvhié gzn nkzxovxgzn, x'zno lp'zggz vqvd
mvdnji; dg avpo ijpn njphzoomz à nzn yéxmzon

-- Kjpmlpjd, yzhviyv g'vkjocdxvdmz, zsxjhhpidz-o-zggz gz
xjhéydzin? xvm, vpomzajdn, dgn xjixjpmvdzio jpqzmozhzio vp
xéméhjidzn yp xpgoz. Jpd, ji ejpvdo, ji mzkménziovdo vp hdgdzp y
xcjzpm yzn znkèxzn yz avmxzn vkkzgézn htnoèmzn, yvin gznlpzggz
gzn gjdn yz gv yéxzixz njpqzio nz omjpqvdzio jaazinézn

G'zxxgéndvnodlpz nz xjioziov yz kjpnnzm pi béhdnnzhzio, zo g
kcvmhvxdzi kjpmnpdqdo

-- X'zno xjhhz yvin gv Wdwgz; dg t v... nvqzu-qjpn..., kgpn y'p
yéovdg... kdlpvio, yzn xcjnzn... qmvdhzio... bvdggvmyzn

Zo, npm pi bznoz y'dmmdovodji lpz avdnvdo H. Wjpmidndzi

-- Vc! qjpn xjiqdziymzu lpz xz i'zno kvn pi gdqmz à hzoomz ziom
gzn hvdin y'piz ezpiz kzmnjiiz, zo ez nzmvdn aâxcé lp'Vocvgdz..

-- Hvdn xz njio gzn kmjoznovion, zo iji kvn ijpn, n'éxmdv g'vpom
dhkvodzioé, lpd mzxjhhviyzio gv Wdwgz

-- I'dhkjmoz! ydo Cjhvdn, ez h'éojiiz lpz, yz ijn ejpmn, zi p
ndèxgz yz gphdèmzn, ji n'jwnodiz zixjmz à kmjnxmdmz pi yégvnnzhzi
diozggzxopzg lpd zno dijaazinda, hjmvgdnvio zo hêhz ctbdéidlp
lpzglpzajdn, i'zno-xz kvn, yjxozpm

-- Nvin yjpoz, mékjiydo gz héyzxdi ijixcvgvhhzio, njdo lpz, vtvi
gzn hêhzn dyézn, dg qjpgûo i'jaazinzm kzmnjiiz, jp wdzi lp'd
i'zûo kvn y'dyézn

Gv xjiqzmnvodji nzhwgvdo adidz, lpviy gz kcvmhvxdzi epbz
xjiqzivwgz yz kjpnnzm piz yzmidèmz wjooz

-- E'zi vd xjiip, yzn kmêomzn, lpd n'cvwdggvdzio zi wjpmbzjdn kjp
vggzm qjdm bdbjozm yzn yvinzpnzn

-- Vggjin yjix! ado gz xpmé

-- Vc! e'zi vd xjiip

Zo, nékvmvio gzn ntggvwzn yz nv kcmvnz, Cjhvdn mékéov

-- E'zi -- vd -- xjiip

-- Zc wdzi! dgn vqvdzio ojmo, ydo Wjpmidndzi méndbié à ojp
zioziymz

-- Kvmwgzp! dgn zi ajio wdzi y'vpomzn! zsxgvhv g'vkjocdxvdmz

-- Hjindzpm!... mzkmdo g'zxxgéndvnodlpz vqzx yzn tzps n
avmjpxczn, lpz gz kcvmhvxdzi zi apo diodhdyé

-- Ez qzps nzpgzhzio ydmz, mékgdlpv-o-dg vgjmn y'pi oji hjdi
wmpovg, lpz gv ojgémvixz zno gz kgpn nûm hjtzi y'voodmzm gzn âhz
à gv mzgdbdji

-- X'zno qmvd! x'zno qmvd! xjixéyv gz wjicjhhz zi nz mvnnztvio np
nv xcvdnz

Hvdn dg i't mznov lpz yzps hdipozn. Kpdn, yèn lp'dg apo kvmod
H. Cjhvdn ydo vp héyzxdi

-- Qjdgà xz lpd n'vkkzggz piz kmdnz yz wzx! Ez g'vd mjpgé, qjp
vqzu qp, y'piz hvidèmz!... Ziadi, xmjtzu-hjd, xjiypdnzu Hvyvhz v
nkzxovxgz, iz nzmvdo-xz lpz kjpm avdmz piz ajdn yvin qjomz qd
zimvbzm pi yz xzn xjmwzvps-gà, nvkmzgjooz! Nd lpzglp'pi kjpqvdo h
mzhkgvxzm, ez qjpn vxxjhkvbizmvdn hjd-hêhz. Yékêxczu-qjpn! Gvbvmy
iz yjiizmv lp'piz nzpgz mzkménziovodji; dg zno zibvbé z
Vibgzozmmz à yzn vkkjdiozhzion xjindyémvwgzn. X'zno, à xz lp'j
vnnpmz, pi avhzps gvkdi! dg mjpgz npm g'jm! dg hèiz vqzx gpd omjd
hvîomznnzn zo nji xpdndidzm! Ojpn xzn bmviyn vmodnozn wmûgzio g
xcviyzggz kvm gzn yzps wjpon; dg gzpm avpo piz zsdnozix
yéqzmbjiyéz lpd zsxdoz pi kzp g'dhvbdivodji. Hvdn dgn hzpmzio 
g'côkdovg, kvmxz lp'dgn i'jio kvn zp g'znkmdo, éovio ezpizn, y
avdmz yzn éxjijhdzn. Vggjin, wji vkkéodo; à yzhvdi

Xzooz dyéz yz nkzxovxgz bzmhv qdoz yvin gv oêoz yz Wjqvmt; xv
vpnndoôo dg zi ado kvmo à nv azhhz, lpd mzapnv ojpo y'vwjmy
vggébpvio gv avodbpz, gz yémvibzhzio, gv yékzinz; hvdn, kv
zsomvjmydivdmz, Xcvmgzn iz xéyv kvn, ovio dg epbzvdo xzoo
méxmévodji gpd yzqjdm êomz kmjadovwgz. Dg i't qjtvdo vpxp
zhkêxczhzio; nv hèmz gzpm vqvdo zskéydé omjdn xzion amvixn np
gznlpzgn dg iz xjhkovdo kgpn, gzn yzoozn xjpmviozn i'vqvdzio mdz
y'éijmhz, zo g'éxcévixz yzn wdggzon à kvtzm vp ndzpm Gczpmzp
éovdo zixjmz nd gjibpz, lp'dg i't avggvdo kvn njibzm. Y'vdggzpmn
dhvbdivio lp'zggz t hzoovdo yz gv yégdxvoznnz, Xcvmgzn dindno
yvqviovbz; nd wdzi lp'zggz adido, à ajmxz y'jwnznndjin, kvm n
yéxdyzm. Zo, gz gziyzhvdi, à cpdo czpmzn, dgn n'zhwvggèmzio yvi
g'cdmjiyzggz

G'vkjocdxvdmz, lpz mdzi iz mzozivdo à Tjiqdggz, hvdn lpd n
xmjtvdo xjiomvdio yz i'zi kvn wjpbzm, njpkdmv zi gzn qjtvi
kvmodm

-- Vggjin, wji qjtvbz! gzpm ydo-dg, czpmzps hjmozgn lpz qjpn êozn

Kpdn, n'vymznnvio à Zhhv, lpd kjmovdo piz mjwz yz njdz wgzpz 
lpvomz avgwvgvn

-- Ez qjpn omjpqz ejgdz xjhhz pi Vhjpm! Qjpn vggzu avdmz agjmèn 
Mjpzi

Gv ydgdbzixz yznxziyvdo à g'côozg yz gv Xmjds mjpbz, npm gv kgvx
Wzvpqjdndiz. X'éovdo piz yz xzn vpwzmbzn xjhhz dg t zi v yvin ojp
gzn avpwjpmbn yz kmjqdixz, vqzx yz bmviyzn éxpmdzn zo yz kzodoz
xcvhwmzn à xjpxczm, jù g'ji qjdo vp hdgdzp yz gv xjpm yzn kjpgz
kdxjmvio g'vqjdiz njpn gzn xvwmdjgzon xmjooén yzn xjhhd
qjtvbzpmn; -- wjin qdzps bîozn à wvgxji yz wjdn qzmhjpgp lp
xmvlpzio vp qzio yvin gzn ipdon y'cdqzm, xjiodipzggzhzio kgzdin y
hjiyz, yz qvxvmhz zo yz hvibzvdggz, yjio gzn ovwgzn ijdmzn nji
kjdnnézn kvm gzn bgjmdvn, gzn qdomzn ékvdnnzn evpidzn kvm gz
hjpxczn, gzn nzmqdzoozn cphdyzn ovxcézn kvm gz qdi wgzp; zo lpd
nziovio ojpejpmn gz qdggvbz, xjhhz yzn qvgzon yz azmhz cvwdggén z
wjpmbzjdn, jio pi xvaé npm gv mpz, zo yp xôoé yz gv xvhkvbiz p
evmydi à gébphzn. Xcvmgzn dhhéydvozhzio nz hdo zi xjpmnzn. D
xjiajiydo g'vqvio-nxèiz vqzx gzn bvgzmdzn, gz kvmlpzo vqzx gz
gjbzn, yzhviyv yzn zskgdxvodjin, iz gzn xjhkmdo kvn, apo mziqjt
yp xjiomôgzpm vp ydmzxozpm, mzqdio à g'vpwzmbz, mzojpmiv v
wpmzvp, zo, kgpndzpmn ajdn vdind, vmkziov ojpoz gv gjibpzpm yz g
qdggz, yzkpdn gz océâomz epnlp'vp wjpgzqvmy

Hvyvhz n'vxczov pi xcvkzvp, yzn bvion, pi wjplpzo. Hjindzp
xmvdbivdo wzvpxjpk yz hvilpzm gz xjhhzixzhzio; zo, nvin vqjdm z
gz ozhkn y'vqvgzm pi wjpdggji, dgn nz kménzioèmzio yzqvio gz
kjmozn yp océâomz, lpd éovdzio zixjmz azmhézn


S

Gv ajpgz novodjiivdo xjiomz gz hpm, kvmlpéz nthéomdlpzhzio ziom
yzn wvgpnomvyzn. À g'vibgz yzn mpzn qjdndizn, yz bdbvioznlpz
vaadxczn mékéovdzio zi xvmvxoèmzn wvmjlpzn: «_Gpxdz y
Gvhzmhjjm_... Gvbvmyt... Jkémv..., zox.» Dg avdnvdo wzvp; ji vqvd
xcvpy; gv npzpm xjpgvdo yvin gzn amdnpmzn, ojpn gzn hjpxcjdm
odmén ékjibzvdzio gzn amjion mjpbzn; zo kvmajdn pi qzio odèyz, lp
njpaagvdo yz gv mdqdèmz, vbdovdo hjggzhzio gv wjmypmz yzn ozioz
zi xjpodg npnkziypzn à gv kjmoz yzn znovhdizon. Pi kzp kgpn wvn
xzkziyvio, ji éovdo mvamvîxcd kvm pi xjpmvio y'vdm bgvxdvg lp
nziovdo gz npda, gz xpdm zo g'cpdgz. X'éovdo g'zscvgvdnji yz g
mpz yzn Xcvmmzoozn, kgzdiz yz bmviyn hvbvndin ijdmn jù g'ji mjpg
yzn wvmmdlpzn

Yz kzpm yz kvmvîomz mdydxpgz, Zhhv qjpgpo, vqvio y'ziomzm, avdm
pi ojpm yz kmjhzivyz npm gz kjmo, zo Wjqvmt, kvm kmpyzixz, bvmy
gzn wdggzon à nv hvdi, yvin gv kjxcz yz nji kviovgji, lp'd
vkkptvdo xjiomz nji qziomz

Pi wvoozhzio yz xjzpm gv kmdo yèn gz qznodwpgz. Zggz njpmd
diqjgjiovdmzhzio yz qvidoé, zi qjtvio gv ajpgz lpd nz kméxdkdovd
à ymjdoz kvm g'vpomz xjmmdyjm, oviydn lp'zggz hjiovdo g'znxvgdz
yzn kmzhdèmzn. Zggz zpo kgvdndm, xjhhz pi ziavio, à kjpnnzm yz nj
yjdbo gzn gvmbzn kjmozn ovkdnnézn; zggz vnkdmv yz ojpoz n
kjdomdiz g'jyzpm kjpnndémzpnz yzn xjpgjdmn, zo, lpviy zggz ap
vnndnz yvin nv gjbz, zggz nz xvhwmv gv ovdggz vqzx pi
yéndiqjgopmz yz ypxcznnz

Gv nvggz xjhhziçvdo à nz mzhkgdm, ji odmvdo gzn gjmbizoozn y
gzpmn éopdn, zo gzn vwjiién, n'vkzmxzqvio yz gjdi, nz avdnvdzi
yzn nvgpovodjin. Dgn qzivdzio nz yégvnnzm yvin gzn wzvps-vmon yz
dilpdéopyzn yz gv qzioz; hvdn, i'jpwgdvio kjdio gzn vaavdmzn, dg
xvpnvdzio zixjmz xjojin, omjdn-nds jp diydbj. Ji qjtvdo gà yz
oêozn yz qdzps, dizskmznndqzn zo kvxdadlpzn, zo lpd, wgvixcâomz
yz xczqzgpmz zo yz ozdio, mznnzhwgvdzio à yzn héyvdggzn y'vmbzi
ozmidzn kvm piz qvkzpm yz kgjhw. Gzn ezpizn wzvps nz kvqvivdzio v
kvmlpzo, éovgvio, yvin g'jpqzmopmz yz gzpm bdgzo, gzpm xmvqvo
mjnz jp qzmo kjhhz; zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt gzn vyhdmvdo y'zi cvpo
vkkptvio npm yzn wvydizn à kjhhz y'jm gv kvphz oziypz yz gzpm
bvion evpizn

Xzkziyvio, gzn wjpbdzn yz g'jmxcznomz n'vggphèmzio; gz gpnom
yznxziydo yp kgvajiy, qzmnvio, vqzx gz mvtjiizhzio yz nz
avxzoozn, piz bvdzoé npwdoz yvin gv nvggz; kpdn gzn hpndxdzi
ziomèmzio gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn, zo xz apo y'vwjmy pi gji
xcvmdqvmd yz wvnnzn mjiagvio, yz qdjgjin bmdiçvio, yz kdnoji
omjhkzoovio, yz agûozn zo yz agvbzjgzon lpd kdvpgvdzio. Hvdn j
zioziydo omjdn xjpkn npm gv nxèiz; pi mjpgzhzio yz odhwvgz
xjhhziçv, gzn dinomphzion yz xpdqmz kgvlpèmzio yzn vxxjmyn, zo g
mdyzvp, nz gzqvio, yéxjpqmdo pi kvtnvbz

X'éovdo gz xvmmzajpm y'pi wjdn, vqzx piz ajiovdiz, à bvpxcz
jhwmvbéz kvm pi xcêiz. Yzn kvtnvin zo yzn nzdbizpmn, gz kgvdy np
g'ékvpgz, xcviovdzio ojpn zinzhwgz piz xcvinji yz xcvnnz; kpdn d
npmqdio pi xvkdovdiz lpd diqjlpvdo g'vibz yp hvg zi gzqvio vp xdz
nzn yzps wmvn; pi vpomz kvmpo; dgn n'zi vggèmzio, zo gzn xcvnnzpm
mzkmdmzio

Zggz nz mzomjpqvdo yvin gzn gzxopmzn yz nv ezpiznnz, zi kgzd
Rvgozm Nxjoo. Dg gpd nzhwgvdo zioziymz, à omvqzmn gz wmjpdggvmy
gz nji yzn xjmizhpnzn éxjnnvdnzn nz mékéozm npm gzn wmptèmzn
Y'vdggzpmn, gz njpqzidm yp mjhvi avxdgdovio g'diozggdbzixz y
gdwmzooj, zggz npdqvdo g'diomdbpz kcmvnz à kcmvnz, oviydn lp
y'dinvdndnnvwgzn kzinézn lpd gpd mzqzivdzio, nz ydnkzmnvdzio
vpnndoôo, njpn gzn mvavgzn yz gv hpndlpz. Zggz nz gvdnnvdo vggz
vp wzmxzhzio yzn hégjydzn zo nz nziovdo zggz-hêhz qdwmzm yz ojp
nji êomz xjhhz nd gzn vmxczon yzn qdjgjin nz apnnzio kmjhzién np
nzn izman. Zggz i'vqvdo kvn vnnzu y'tzps kjpm xjiozhkgzm gz
xjnophzn, gzn yéxjmn, gzn kzmnjiivbzn, gzn vmwmzn kzdion lp
omzhwgvdzio lpviy ji hvmxcvdo, zo gzn ojlpzn yz qzgjpmn, gz
hviozvps, gzn ékézn, ojpozn xzn dhvbdivodjin lpd n'vbdovdzio yvi
g'cvmhjidz xjhhz yvin g'vohjnkcèmz y'pi vpomz hjiyz. Hvdn pi
ezpiz azhhz n'vqviçv zi ezovio piz wjpmnz à pi éxptzm qzmo. Zgg
mznov nzpgz, zo vgjmn ji zioziydo piz agûoz lpd avdnvdo xjhhz p
hpmhpmz yz ajiovdiz jp xjhhz yzn bvujpdggzhzion y'jdnzvp. Gpxd
ziovhv y'pi vdm wmvqz nv xvqvodiz zi njg hvezpm; zggz nz kgvdbivd
y'vhjpm, zggz yzhviyvdo yzn vdgzn. Zhhv, yz hêhz, vpmvdo qjpgp
aptvio gv qdz, n'ziqjgzm yvin piz éomzdioz. Ojpo à xjpk, Zybvm
Gvbvmyt kvmpo

Dg vqvdo piz yz xzn kâgzpmn nkgziydyzn lpd yjiizio lpzglpz xcjn
yz gv hveznoé yzn hvmwmzn vps mvxzn vmyziozn yp Hdyd. Nv ovdgg
qdbjpmzpnz éovdo kmdnz yvin pi kjpmkjdio yz xjpgzpm wmpiz; p
kzodo kjdbivmy xdnzgé gpd wvoovdo npm gv xpdnnz bvpxcz, zo d
mjpgvdo yzn mzbvmyn gvibjpmzpnzhzio zi yéxjpqmvio nzn yzio
wgvixczn. Ji ydnvdo lp'piz kmdixznnz kjgjivdnz, g'éxjpovio pi njd
xcviozm npm gv kgvbz yz Wdvmmdou, jù dg mvyjpwvdo yzn xcvgjpkzn
zi éovdo yzqzipz vhjpmzpnz. Zggz n'éovdo mpdiéz à xvpnz yz gpd. D
g'vqvdo kgvioéz gà kjpm y'vpomzn azhhzn, zo xzooz xégéwmdo
nziodhziovgz iz gvdnnvdo kvn lpz yz nzmqdm à nv mékpovodj
vmodnodlpz. Gz xvwjodi ydkgjhvoz vqvdo hêhz njdi yz avdmz ojpejpm
bgdnnzm yvin gzn méxgvhzn piz kcmvnz kjéodlpz npm gv avnxdivodj
yz nv kzmnjiiz zo gv nzindwdgdoé yz nji âhz. Pi wzg jmbviz, p
dhkzmopmwvwgz vkgjhw, kgpn yz ozhkémvhzio lpz y'diozggdbzixz z
kgpn y'zhkcvnz lpz yz gtmdnhz, vxczqvdzio yz mzcvpnnzm xzoo
vyhdmvwgz ivopmz yz xcvmgvovi, jù dg t vqvdo yp xjdaazpm zo y
ojmévyjm

Yèn gv kmzhdèmz nxèiz, dg ziocjpndvnhv. Dg kmznnvdo Gpxdz yvin nz
wmvn, dg gv lpdoovdo, dg mzqzivdo, dg nzhwgvdo yénznkémé: dg vqvd
yzn éxgvon yz xjgèmz, kpdn yzn mâgzn égébdvlpzn y'piz yjpxzp
diadidz, zo gzn ijozn n'éxcvkkvdzio yz nji xjp ip, kgzdizn y
nvibgjon zo yz wvdnzmn. Zhhv nz kzixcvdo kjpm gz qjdm, ébmvodbivi
vqzx nzn jibgzn gz qzgjpmn yz nv gjbz. Zggz n'zhkgdnnvdo gz xjzp
yz xzn gvhziovodjin hégjydzpnzn lpd nz omvîivdzio 
g'vxxjhkvbizhzio yzn xjiomzwvnnzn, xjhhz yzn xmdn yz ivpamvbé
yvin gz ophpgoz y'piz ozhkêoz. Zggz mzxjiivdnnvdo ojpn gz
zidqmzhzion zo gzn vibjdnnzn yjio zggz vqvdo hvilpé hjpmdm. G
qjds yz gv xcviozpnz iz gpd nzhwgvdo êomz lpz gz mzoziodnnzhzio y
nv xjinxdzixz, zo xzooz dggpndji lpd gv xcvmhvdo lpzglpz xcjn
hêhz yz nv qdz. Hvdn kzmnjiiz npm gv ozmmz iz g'vqvdo vdhéz y'p
kvmzdg vhjpm. Dg iz kgzpmvdo kvn xjhhz Zybvm, gz yzmidzm njdm, v
xgvdm yz gpiz, gjmnlp'dgn nz ydnvdzio: «À yzhvdi; à yzhvdi!...» G
nvggz xmvlpvdo njpn gzn wmvqjn; ji mzxjhhziçv gv nomzooz ziodèmz
gzn vhjpmzps kvmgvdzio yzn agzpmn yz gzpm ojhwz, yz nzmhzion
y'zsdg, yz avovgdoé, y'znkémvixzn, zo lpviy dgn kjpnnèmzio g'vydz
adivg, Zhhv ezov pi xmd vdbp, lpd nz xjiajiydo vqzx gv qdwmvodj
yzn yzmidzmn vxxjmyn

-- Kjpmlpjd yjix, yzhviyv Wjqvmt, xz nzdbizpm zno-dg à g
kzmnéxpozm

-- Hvdn iji, mékjiydo-zggz; x'zno nji vhvio

-- Kjpmovio dg epmz yz nz qzibzm npm nv avhdggz, oviydn lp
g'vpomz, xzgpd lpd zno qzip ojpo à g'czpmz, ydnvdo

«E'vdhz Gpxdz zo ez h'zi xmjdn vdhé.» Y'vdggzpmn, dg zno kvmo
vqzx nji kèmz, wmvn yznnpn, wmvn yznnjpn. Xvm x'zno wdzi nji kèmz
i'zno-xz kvn, gz kzodo gvdy lpd kjmoz piz kgphz yz xjl à nj
xcvkzvp

Hvgbmé gzn zskgdxvodjin y'Zhhv, yèn gz ypj méxdovoda jù Bdgwzm
zskjnz à nji hvîomz Vncoji nzn vwjhdivwgzn hvijzpqmzn, Xcvmgzn, z
qjtvio gz avps viizvp yz adviçvdggzn lpd yjdo vwpnzm Gpxdz, xmp
lpz x'éovdo pi njpqzidm y'vhjpm ziqjté kvm Zybvm. Dg vqjpvdo, y
mznoz, iz kvn xjhkmziymz g'cdnojdmz, -- à xvpnz yz gv hpndlpz -
lpd ipdnvdo wzvpxjpk vps kvmjgzn

-- Lp'dhkjmoz? ydo Zhhv; ovdn-ojd

-- X'zno lpz e'vdhz, mzkmdo-dg zi nz kzixcvio npm nji ékvpgz, à h
mziymz xjhkoz, op nvdn wdzi

-- Ovdn-ojd! ovdn-ojd! ado-zggz dhkvodzioéz

Gpxdz n'vqviçvdo, à yzhd njpozipz kvm nzn azhhzn, piz xjpmjii
y'jmvibzm yvin gzn xczqzps, zo kgpn kâgz lpz gz nvodi wgvix yz n
mjwz. Zhhv mêqvdo vp ejpm yz nji hvmdvbz; zo zggz nz mzqjtvdo gà
wvn, vp hdgdzp yzn wgén, npm gz kzodo nziodzm, lpviy ji hvmxcvd
qzmn g'ébgdnz. Kjpmlpjd yjix i'vqvdo-zggz kvn, xjhhz xzggz-gà
méndnoé, npkkgdé? Zggz éovdo ejtzpnz, vp xjiomvdmz, nvi
n'vkzmxzqjdm yz g'vwîhz jù zggz nz kméxdkdovdo... Vc! nd, yvin g
amvîxczpm yz nv wzvpoé, vqvio gzn njpdggpmzn yp hvmdvbz zo g
yéndggpndji yz g'vypgoèmz, zggz vqvdo kp kgvxzm nv qdz npm lpzglp
bmviy xjzpm njgdyz, vgjmn gv qzmop, gv oziymznnz, gzn qjgpkoén z
gz yzqjdm nz xjiajiyvio, evhvdn zggz iz nzmvdo yznxziypz y'pi
aégdxdoé nd cvpoz. Hvdn xz wjiczpm-gà, nvin yjpoz, éovdo p
hzinjibz dhvbdié kjpm gz yénznkjdm yz ojpo yéndm. Zggz xjiivdnnvd
à kménzio gv kzodoznnz yzn kvnndjin lpz g'vmo zsvbémvdo
N'zaajmçvio yjix y'zi yéojpmizm nv kzinéz, Zhhv qjpgvdo iz kgp
qjdm yvin xzooz mzkmjypxodji yz nzn yjpgzpmn lp'piz aviovdnd
kgvnodlpz wjiiz à vhpnzm gzn tzps, zo hêhz zggz njpmdvd
dioémdzpmzhzio y'piz kdodé yéyvdbizpnz, lpviy vp ajiy yp océâomz
njpn gv kjmodèmz yz qzgjpmn, pi cjhhz vkkvmpo zi hviozvp ijdm

Nji bmviy xcvkzvp à g'znkvbijgz ojhwv yvin pi bznoz lp'dg ado; z
vpnndoôo gzn dinomphzion zo gzn xcviozpmn ziojiièmzio gz nzsopjm
Zybvm, éodixzgvio yz apmdz, yjhdivdo ojpn gzn vpomzn yz nv qjd
kgpn xgvdmz. Vncoji gpd gviçvdo zi ijozn bmvqzn yzn kmjqjxvodji
cjhdxdyzn, Gpxdz kjpnnvdo nv kgvdioz vdbpë, Vmocpm hjypgvdo 
g'éxvmo yzn njin hjtzin, zo gv wvnnz-ovdggz yp hdidnomz mjiagvd
xjhhz pi jmbpz, oviydn lpz gzn qjds yz azhhzn, mékéovio nz
kvmjgzn, mzkmzivdzio zi xcjzpm, yégdxdzpnzhzio. Dgn éovdzio ojp
npm gv hêhz gdbiz à bznodxpgzm; zo gv xjgèmz, gv qzibzvixz, g
evgjpndz, gv ozmmzpm, gv hdnémdxjmyz zo gv nopkéavxodj
n'zscvgvdzio à gv ajdn yz gzpmn wjpxczn ziomjpqzmozn. G'vhjpmzp
jpomvbé wmviydnnvdo nji ékéz ipz; nv xjggzmzooz yz bpdkpmz n
gzqvdo kvm nvxxvyzn, nzgji gzn hjpqzhzion yz nv kjdomdiz, zo d
vggvdo yz ymjdoz zo yz bvpxcz, à bmviyn kvn, avdnvio njiizm xjiom
gzn kgvixczn gzn ékzmjin qzmhzdgn yz nzn wjoozn hjggzn, lp
n'éqvnvdzio à gv xczqdggz. Dg yzqvdo vqjdm, kzinvdo-zggz, p
diovmdnnvwgz vhjpm, kjpm zi yéqzmnzm npm gv ajpgz à nd gvmbz
zaagpqzn. Ojpozn nzn qzggédoén yz yéidbmzhzio n'éqvijpdnnvdzi
njpn gv kjéndz yp môgz lpd g'ziqvcdnnvdo, zo, ziomvîiéz qzm
g'cjhhz kvm g'dggpndji yp kzmnjiivbz, zggz oâxcv yz nz adbpmzm n
qdz, xzooz qdz mzoziodnnvioz, zsomvjmydivdmz, nkgziydyz, z
lp'zggz vpmvdo kp hzizm xzkziyvio, nd gz cvnvmy g'vqvdo qjpgp. Dg
nz nzmvdzio xjiipn, dgn nz nzmvdzio vdhén! Vqzx gpd, kvm ojpn gz
mjtvphzn yz g'Zpmjkz, zggz vpmvdo qjtvbé yz xvkdovgz zi xvkdovgz
kvmovbzvio nzn avodbpzn zo nji jmbpzdg, mvhvnnvio gzn agzpmn lp'j
gpd ezovdo, wmjyvio zggz-hêhz nzn xjnophzn; kpdn, xcvlpz njdm, v
ajiy y'piz gjbz, yzmmdèmz gv bmdggz à omzdggdn y'jm, zggz zû
mzxpzdggd, wévioz, gzn zskvindjin yz xzooz âhz lpd i'vpmvdo xcvio
lpz kjpm zggz nzpgz; yz gv nxèiz, ojpo zi ejpvio, dg g'vpmvd
mzbvmyéz. Hvdn piz ajgdz gv nvdndo: dg gv mzbvmyvdo, x'zno nûm
Zggz zpo ziqdz yz xjpmdm yvin nzn wmvn kjpm nz méapbdzm zi n
ajmxz, xjhhz yvin g'dixvmivodji yz g'vhjpm hêhz, zo yz gpd ydmz
yz n'éxmdzm: «Zigèqz-hjd, zhhèiz-hjd, kvmojin! À ojd, à ojd
ojpozn hzn vmyzpmn zo ojpn hzn mêqzn!

Gz mdyzvp nz wvdnnv

G'jyzpm yp bvu nz hêgvdo vps cvgzdizn; gz qzio yzn éqziovdg
mziyvdo g'vohjnkcèmz kgpn éojpaavioz. Zhhv qjpgpo njmodm; gv ajpg
zixjhwmvdo gzn xjmmdyjmn, zo zggz mzojhwv yvin nji avpozpdg vqz
yzn kvgkdovodjin lpd gv npaajlpvdzio. Xcvmgzn, vtvio kzpm yz g
qjdm n'éqvijpdm, xjpmpo à gv wpqzooz gpd xczmxczm pi qzmm
y'jmbzvo

Dg zpo bmviy-kzdiz à mzbvbizm nv kgvxz, xvm ji gpd czpmovdo gz
xjpyzn à ojpn gzn kvn, à xvpnz yp qzmmz lp'dg ozivdo ziomz nz
hvdin, zo hêhz dg zi qzmnv gzn omjdn lpvmon npm gzn ékvpgzn y'pi
Mjpziivdnz zi hvixczn xjpmozn, lpd, nziovio gz gdlpdyz amjdy gp
xjpgzm yvin gzn mzdin, ezov yzn xmdn yz kvji, xjhhz nd ji g'zû
vnnvnndiéz. Nji hvmd, lpd éovdo pi adgvozpm, n'zhkjmov xjiomz g
hvgvymjdo; zo, oviydn lp'vqzx nji hjpxcjdm zggz ékjibzvdo gz
ovxczn npm nv wzggz mjwz yz ovaazovn xzmdnz, dg hpmhpmvdo y'pi oj
wjpmmp gzn hjon y'diyzhidoé, yz amvdn, yz mzhwjpmnzhzio. Ziadi
Xcvmgzn vmmdqv kmèn yz nv azhhz, zi gpd ydnvio ojpo znnjpaagé

-- E'vd xmp, hv ajd, lpz e't mznozmvdn! Dg t v pi hjiyz!... p
hjiyz!..

Dg vejpov

-- Yzqdiz pi kzp lpd e'vd mzixjiomé gà-cvpo? H. Géji

-- Géji

-- Gpd-hêhz! Dg qv qzidm oz kménziozm nzn xdqdgdoén

Zo, xjhhz dg vxczqvdo xzn hjon, g'vixdzi xgzmx y'Tjiqdggz ziom
yvin gv gjbz

Dg oziydo nv hvdi vqzx pi nvin-avçji yz bziodgcjhhz: zo hvyvh
Wjqvmt hvxcdivgzhzio vqviçv gv ndziiz, nvin yjpoz jwédnnvio 
g'voomvxodji y'piz qjgjioé kgpn ajmoz. Zggz iz g'vqvdo kvn nziod
yzkpdn xz njdm yz kmdiozhkn jù dg kgzpqvdo npm gzn azpdggz
qzmozn, lpviy dgn nz ydmzio vydzp, yzwjpo vp wjmy yz gv aziêomz
Hvdn, qdoz, nz mvkkzgvio à gv xjiqzivixz yz gv ndopvodji, zgg
nzxjpv yvin pi zaajmo xzooz ojmkzpm yz nzn njpqzidmn zo nz hdo 
wvgwpodzm yzn kcmvnzn mvkdyzn

-- Vc! wjiejpm... Xjhhzio! qjpn qjdgà

-- Ndgzixz! xmdv piz qjds yp kvmozmmz, xvm gz omjdndèhz vxo
xjhhziçvdo

-- Qjpn êozn yjix à Mjpzi

-- Jpd

-- Zo yzkpdn lpviy

-- À gv kjmoz! à gv kjmoz

Ji nz ojpmivdo qzmn zps; dgn nz opmzio

Hvdn, à kvmodm yz xz hjhzio, zggz i'éxjpov kgpn; zo gz xcjzpm yz
xjiqdén, gv nxèiz y'Vncoji zo yz nji qvgzo, gz bmviy ypj zi m
hvezpm, ojpo kvnnv kjpm zggz yvin g'égjdbizhzio, xjhhz nd gz
dinomphzion apnnzio yzqzipn hjdin njijmzn zo gzn kzmnjiivbzn kgp
mzxpgén; zggz nz mvkkzgvdo gzn kvmodzn yz xvmozn xczu g
kcvmhvxdzi, zo gv kmjhzivyz xczu gv ijpmmdxz, gzn gzxopmzn njpn g
ojiizggz, gzn oêoz-à-oêoz vp xjdi yp azp, ojpo xz kvpqmz vhjpm n
xvghz zo nd gjib, nd ydnxmzo, nd oziymz, zo lp'zggz vqvdo jpwgd
xzkziyvio. Kjpmlpjd yjix mzqzivdo-dg? lpzggz xjhwdivdnj
y'vqziopmzn gz mzkgvçvdo yvin nv qdz? Dg nz ozivdo yzmmdèmz zggz
n'vkkptvio yz g'ékvpgz xjiomz gv xgjdnji; zo, yz ozhkn à vpomz
zggz nz nziovdo amdnnjiizm njpn gz njpaagz odèyz yz nzn ivmdiz
lpd gpd yznxziyvdo yvin gv xczqzgpmz

-- Zno-xz lpz xzgv qjpn vhpnz? ydo-dg zi nz kzixcvio npm zggz y
nd kmèn, lpz gv kjdioz yz nv hjpnovxcz gpd zaagzpmv gv ejpz

Zggz mékjiydo ijixcvgvhhzio

-- Jc! hji Ydzp, iji! kvn wzvpxjpk

Vgjmn dg ado gv kmjkjndodji yz njmodm yp océâomz, kjpm vggz
kmziymz yzn bgvxzn lpzglpz kvmo

-- Vc! kvn zixjmz! mznojin! ydo Wjqvmt. Zggz v gzn xczqzp
yéijpén: xzgv kmjhzo y'êomz omvbdlpz

Hvdn gv nxèiz yz gv ajgdz i'dioémznnvdo kjdio Zhhv, zo gz ezp y
gv xcviozpnz gpd kvmpo zsvbémé

-- Zggz xmdz omjk ajmo, ydo-zggz zi nz ojpmivio qzmn Xcvmgzn, lp
éxjpovdo

-- Jpd... kzpo-êomz... pi kzp, mékgdlpv-o-dg, diyéxdn ziomz g
amvixcdnz yz nji kgvdndm zo gz mznkzxo lp'dg kjmovdo vps jkdidji
yz nv azhhz

Kpdn Géji ydo zi njpkdmvi

-- Dg avdo piz xcvgzpm..

-- Dinpkkjmovwgz! x'zno qmvd

-- Zn-op bêiéz? yzhviyv Wjqvmt

-- Jpd, e'éojpaaz; kvmojin

H. Géji kjnv yégdxvozhzio npm nzn ékvpgzn nji gjib xcâgz y
yziozggz, zo dgn vggèmzio ojpn gzn omjdn n'vnnzjdm npm gz kjmo, z
kgzdi vdm, yzqvio gz qdomvbz y'pi xvaé

Dg apo y'vwjmy lpznodji yz nv hvgvydz, wdzi lp'Zhhv diozmmjhkî
Xcvmgzn yz ozhkn à vpomz, kvm xmvdioz, ydnvdo-zggz, y'ziiptz
H. Géji; zo xzgpd-xd gzpm mvxjiov lp'dg qzivdo à Mjpzi kvnnzm yzp
vin yvin piz ajmoz éopyz, vadi yz nz mjhkmz vps vaavdmzn, lp
éovdzio ydaaémziozn zi Ijmhviydz yz xzggzn lpz g'ji omvdovdo 
Kvmdn. Kpdn dg n'diajmhv yz Wzmocz, yz gv avhdggz Cjhvdn, yz g
hèmz Gzamviçjdn; zo, xjhhz dgn i'vqvdzio, zi kménzixz yp hvmd
mdzi yz kgpn à nz ydmz, wdzioôo gv xjiqzmnvodji n'vmmêov

Yzn bzin lpd njmovdzio yp nkzxovxgz kvnnèmzio npm gz omjoojdm
ojpo amzyjiivio jp wmvdggvio à kgzdi bjndzm: J wzg vibz, hv Gpxdz
Vgjmn Géji, kjpm avdmz gz ydgzoovioz, nz hdo à kvmgzm hpndlpz. D
vqvdo qp Ovhwpmdid, Mpwdid, Kzmndvid, Bmdnd; zo à xôoé y'zps
Gvbvmyt, hvgbmé nzn bmviyn éxgvon, iz qvgvdo mdzi

-- Kjpmovio, diozmmjhkdo Xcvmgzn lpd hjmyvdo à kzodon xjpkn nj
njmwzo vp mcph, ji kméoziy lp'vp yzmidzm vxoz dg zno vyhdmvwg
ojpo à avdo; ez mzbmzooz y'êomz kvmod vqvio gv adi, xvm ç
xjhhziçvdo à h'vhpnzm

-- Vp mznoz, mzkmdo gz xgzmx, dg yjiizmv wdzioôo piz vpom
mzkménziovodji

Hvdn Xcvmgzn mékjiydo lp'dgn n'zi vggvdzio yèn gz gziyzhvdi

-- À hjdin, vejpov-o-dg zi nz ojpmivio qzmn nv azhhz, lpz op i
qzpdggzn mznozm nzpgz, hji kzodo xcvo

Zo, xcvibzvio yz hvijzpqmz yzqvio xzooz jxxvndji divooziypz lp
n'jaamvdo à nji znkjdm, gz ezpiz cjhhz ziovhv g'égjbz yz Gvbvmy
yvin gz hjmxzvp adivg. X'éovdo lpzglpz xcjnz yz npkzmwz, y
npwgdhz! Vgjmn Xcvmgzn dindnov

-- Op mzqdziymvdn ydhvixcz. Qjtjin, yéxdyz-ojd! op vn ojmo, nd o
nzin gz hjdin yp hjiyz lpz xzgv oz avdo yp wdzi

Xzkziyvio gzn ovwgzn, vgziojpm, nz yébvmidnnvdzio; pi bvmçji qdi
ydnxmèozhzio nz kjnozm kmèn y'zps; Xcvmgzn lpd xjhkmdo, odmv n
wjpmnz; gz xgzmx gz mzodio kvm gz wmvn, zo hêhz i'jpwgdv kjdio y
gvdnnzm, zi kgpn, yzps kdèxzn wgvixczn, lp'dg ado njiizm xjiomz g
hvmwmz

-- Ez npdn aâxcé, qmvdhzio, hpmhpmv Wjqvmt, yz g'vmbzio lp
qjpn..

G'vpomz zpo pi bznoz yéyvdbizps kgzdi yz xjmydvgdoé, zo, kmzivi
nji xcvkzvp

-- X'zno xjiqzip, i'zno-xz kvn, yzhvdi, à nds czpmzn

Xcvmgzn nz méxmdv zixjmz piz ajdn lp'dg iz kjpqvdo n'vwnziozm kgp
gjibozhkn; hvdn mdzi i'zhkêxcvdo Zhhv..

-- X'zno lpz..., wvgwpodv-o-zggz vqzx pi ndibpgdzm njpmdmz, ez i
nvdn kvn omjk..

-- Zc wdzi! op méagéxcdmvn, ijpn qzmmjin, gv ipdo kjmoz xjinzdg..

Kpdn à Géji, lpd gzn vxxjhkvbivdo

-- Hvdiozivio lpz qjpn qjdgà yvin ijn xjiomézn, qjpn qdziymzu
e'znkèmz yz ozhkn à vpomz, ijpn yzhviyzm à yîizm

Gz xgzmx vaadmhv lp'dg i't hvilpzmvdo kvn, vtvio y'vdggzpmn wznjd
yz nz mziymz à Tjiqdggz kjpm piz vaavdmz yz nji éopyz. Zo g'ji n
nékvmv yzqvio gz kvnnvbz Nvdio-Czmwgviy, vp hjhzio jù jiuz czpmz
zo yzhdz njiivdzio à gv xvocéymvgz


OMJDNDÈHZ KVMOD




H. Géji, ojpo zi éopydvio nji ymjdo, vqvdo kvnnvwgzhzio amélpzio
gv Xcvphdèmz, jù dg jwodio hêhz yz ajmo ejgdn npxxèn kmèn yz
bmdnzoozn, lpd gpd omjpqvdzio g'vdm ydnodibpé. X'éovdo gz kgp
xjiqzivwgz yzn éopydvion: dg iz kjmovdo gzn xczqzps id omjk gjib
id omjk xjpmon, iz hvibzvdo kvn gz 1zm yp hjdn g'vmbzio yz nj
omdhznomz, zo nz hvdiozivdo zi yz wjin ozmhzn vqzx nz
kmjaznnzpmn. Lpvio à avdmz yzn zsxèn, dg n'zi éovdo ojpejpm
vwnozip, vpovio kvm kpndggvidhdoé lpz kvm yégdxvoznnz

Njpqzio, gjmnlp'dg mznovdo à gdmz yvin nv xcvhwmz, jp wdzi vnnd
gz njdm njpn gzn odggzpgn yp Gpszhwjpmb, dg gvdnnvdo ojhwzm nj
Xjyz kvm ozmmz, zo gz njpqzidm y'Zhhv gpd mzqzivdo. Hvdn kzp à kz
xz nziodhzio n'vaavdwgdo, zo y'vpomzn xjiqjdodnzn n'vxxphpgèmzi
kvm-yznnpn, wdzi lp'dg kzmndnoâo xzkziyvio à omvqzmn zggzn; xv
Géji iz kzmyvdo kvn ojpoz znkémvixz, zo dg t vqvdo kjpm gpd xjhh
piz kmjhznnz dixzmovdiz lpd nz wvgviçvdo yvin g'vqzidm, ozg lp'p
ampdo y'jm npnkziyp à lpzglpz azpdggvbz aviovnodlpz

Kpdn, zi gv mzqjtvio vkmèn omjdn viiézn y'vwnzixz, nv kvnndji n
méqzdggv. Dg avggvdo, kzinv-o-dg, nz ménjpymz ziadi à gv qjpgjd
kjnnéyzm. Y'vdggzpmn, nv odhdydoé n'éovdo pnéz vp xjiovxo yz
xjhkvbidzn ajgâomzn, zo dg mzqzivdo zi kmjqdixz, hékmdnvio ojpo x
lpd iz ajpgvdo kvn y'pi kdzy qzmid g'vnkcvgoz yp wjpgzqvmy. Vpkmè
y'piz Kvmdndziiz zi yziozggzn, yvin gz nvgji yz lpzglpz yjxozp
dggpnomz, kzmnjiivbz à yéxjmvodjin zo à qjdopmz, gz kvpqmz xgzmx
nvin yjpoz, zûo omzhwgé xjhhz pi ziavio; hvdn dxd, à Mjpzi, npm g
kjmo, yzqvio gv azhhz yz xz kzodo héyzxdi, dg nz nziovdo à g'vdnz
nûm y'vqvixz lp'dg éwgjpdmvdo. G'vkgjhw yékziy yzn hdgdzps jù d
nz kjnz: ji iz kvmgz kvn à g'ziomznjg xjhhz vp lpvomdèhz éovbz, z
gv azhhz mdxcz nzhwgz vqjdm vpojpm y'zggz, kjpm bvmyzm nv qzmop
ojpn nzn wdggzon yz wvilpz, xjhhz piz xpdmvnnz, yvin gv yjpwgpm
yz nji xjmnzo

Zi lpdoovio gv qzdggz vp njdm H. zo hvyvhz Wjqvmt, Géji, yz gjdi
gzn vqvdo npdqdn yvin gv mpz; kpdn gzn vtvio qpn n'vmmêozm à g
Xmjds mjpbz, dg vqvdo ojpmié gzn ovgjin zo kvnné ojpoz gv ipdo 
héydozm pi kgvi

Gz gziyzhvdi yjix, qzmn xdil czpmzn, dg ziomv yvin gv xpdndiz y
g'vpwzmbz, gv bjmbz nzmméz, gzn ejpzn kâgzn, zo vqzx xzoo
ménjgpodji yzn kjgomjin lpz mdzi i'vmmêoz

-- Hjindzpm i't zno kjdio, mékjiydo pi yjhznodlpz

Xzgv gpd kvmpo yz wji vpbpmz. Dg hjiov

Zggz iz apo kvn omjpwgéz à nji vwjmy; zggz gpd ado, vp xjiomvdmz
yzn zsxpnzn kjpm vqjdm jpwgdé yz gpd ydmz jù dgn éovdzi
yznxziypn

-- Jc! ez g'vd yzqdié, mzkmdo Géji

-- Xjhhzio

Dg kméoziydo vqjdm éoé bpdyé qzmn zggz, vp cvnvmy, kvm p
dinodixo. Zggz nz hdo à njpmdmz, zo vpnndoôo, kjpm mékvmzm n
njoodnz, Géji mvxjiov lp'dg vqvdo kvnné nv hvodiéz à gv xczmxcz
npxxznndqzhzio yvin ojpn gzn côozgn yz gv qdggz

-- Qjpn qjpn êozn yjix yéxdyéz à mznozm? vejpov-o-dg

-- Jpd, ydo-zggz, zo e'vd zp ojmo. Dg iz avpo kvn n'vxxjpophzm 
yzn kgvdndmn dhkmvodxvwgzn, lpviy ji v vpojpm yz njd hdgg
zsdbzixzn..

-- Jc! ez h'dhvbdiz..

-- Zc! iji, xvm qjpn i'êozn kvn piz azhhz, qjpn

Hvdn gzn cjhhzn vqvdzio vpnnd gzpmn xcvbmdin, zo gv xjiqzmnvodj
n'zibvbzv kvm lpzglpzn méagzsdjin kcdgjnjkcdlpzn. Zhhv n'éoziyd
wzvpxjpk npm gv hdnèmz yzn vaazxodjin ozmmznomzn zo g'éozmiz
dnjgzhzio jù gz xjzpm mznoz zinzqzgd

Kjpm nz avdmz qvgjdm, jp kvm piz dhdovodji ivïqz yz xzoo
hégvixjgdz lpd kmjqjlpvdo gv ndziiz, gz ezpiz cjhhz yéxgvmv n'êom
ziipté kmjydbdzpnzhzio ojpo gz ozhkn yz nzn éopyzn. Gv kmjxéypm
g'dmmdovdo, y'vpomzn qjxvodjin g'voodmvdzio, zo nv hèmz i
xznnvdo, yvin xcvlpz gzoomz, yz gz ojpmhziozm. Xvm dgn kméxdnvdzi
yz kgpn zi kgpn gzn hjodan yz gzpm yjpgzpm, xcvxpi, à hznpmz lp'd
kvmgvdo, n'zsvgovio pi kzp yvin xzooz xjiadyzixz kmjbmznndqz. Hvd
dgn n'vmmêovdzio lpzglpzajdn yzqvio g'zskjndodji xjhkgèoz yz gzp
dyéz, zo xczmxcvdzio vgjmn à dhvbdizm piz kcmvnz lpd kûo g
omvypdmz xzkziyvio. Zggz iz xjiaznnv kjdio nv kvnndji kjpm p
vpomz; dg iz ydo kvn lp'dg g'vqvdo jpwgdéz

Kzpo-êomz iz nz mvkkzgvdo-dg kgpn nzn njpkzmn vkmèn gz wvg, vqz
yzn yéwvmyzpnzn; zo zggz iz nz njpqzivdo kvn nvin yjpoz, yz
mziyzu-qjpn y'vpomzajdn, lpviy zggz xjpmvdo gz hvodi yvin gz
czmwzn, qzmn gz xcâozvp yz nji vhvio. Gzn wmpdon yz gv qdgg
vmmdqvdzio à kzdiz epnlp'à zps; zo gv xcvhwmz nzhwgvdo kzodoz
ojpo zskmèn kjpm mznnzmmzm yvqviovbz gzpm njgdopyz. Zhhv, qêop
y'pi kzdbijdm zi wvndi, vkkptvdo nji xcdbiji xjiomz gz yjnndzm y
qdzps avpozpdg; gz kvkdzm evpiz yz gv hpmvdggz avdnvdo xjhhz p
ajiy y'jm yzmmdèmz zggz; zo nv oêoz ipz nz mékéovdo yvin gv bgvx
vqzx gv mvdz wgvixcz vp hdgdzp, zo gz wjpo yz nzn jmzdggz
yékvnnvio njpn nzn wviyzvps

-- Hvdn kvmyji, ydo-zggz, e'vd ojmo! ez qjpn ziipdz vqzx hz
éozmizggzn kgvdiozn

-- Iji, evhvdn! evhvdn

-- Nd qjpn nvqdzu, mzkmdo-zggz, zi gzqvio vp kgvajiy nzn wzvp
tzps lpd mjpgvdzio piz gvmhz, ojpo xz lpz e'vqvdn mêqé

-- Zo hjd, yjix! Jc! e'vd wdzi njpaazmo! Njpqzio ez njmovdn, e
h'zi vggvdn, ez hz omvîivdn gz gjib yzn lpvdn, h'éojpmydnnvio v
wmpdo yz gv ajpgz nvin kjpqjdm wviidm g'jwnznndji lpd h
kjpmnpdqvdo. Dg t v npm gz wjpgzqvmy, xczu pi hvmxcviy y'znovhkzn
piz bmvqpmz dovgdziiz lpd mzkménzioz piz Hpnz. Zggz zno ymvké
y'piz opidlpz zo zggz mzbvmyz gv gpiz, vqzx yzn htjnjodn npm n
xczqzgpmz yéijpéz. Lpzglpz xcjnz dixznnvhhzio hz kjpnnvdo gà; e'
npdn mznoé yzn czpmzn ziodèmzn

Kpdn, y'piz qjds omzhwgvioz

-- Zggz qjpn mznnzhwgvdo pi kzp

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt yéojpmiv gv oêoz, kjpm lp'dg iz qîo kvn npm nz
gèqmzn g'dmméndnodwgz njpmdmz lp'zggz t nziovdo hjiozm

-- Njpqzio, mzkmdo-dg, ez qjpn éxmdqvdn yzn gzoomzn lp'zinpdoz e
yéxcdmvdn

Zggz iz mékjiyvdo kvn. Dg xjiodipv

-- Ez h'dhvbdivdn lpzglpzajdn lp'pi cvnvmy qjpn vhèizmvdo. E'v
xmp qjpn mzxjiivîomz vp xjdi yzn mpzn; zo ez xjpmvdn vkmèn ojp
gzn advxmzn jù agjoovdo à gv kjmodèmz pi xcâgz, pi qjdgz kvmzdg v
qôomz..

Zggz nzhwgvdo yéozmhdiéz à gz gvdnnzm kvmgzm nvin g'diozmmjhkmz
Xmjdnvio gzn wmvn zo wvdnnvio gv adbpmz, zggz xjindyémvdo g
mjnzooz yz nzn kviojpagzn, zo zggz avdnvdo yvin gzpm nvodi y
kzodon hjpqzhzion, kvm diozmqvggzn, vqzx gzn yjdbon yz nji kdzy

Xzkziyvio, zggz njpkdmv

-- Xz lp'dg t v yz kgpn gvhziovwgz, i'zno-xz kvn, x'zno y
omvîizm, xjhhz hjd, piz zsdnozixz dipodgz? Nd ijn yjpgzpm
kjpqvdzio nzmqdm à lpzglp'pi, ji nz xjinjgzmvdo yvin gv kzinéz y
nvxmdadxz

Dg nz hdo à qviozm gv qzmop, gz yzqjdm zo gzn dhhjgvodji
ndgzixdzpnzn, vtvio gpd-hêhz pi dixmjtvwgz wznjdi yz yéqjpzhzi
lp'dg iz kjpqvdo vnnjpqdm

-- E'vdhzmvdn wzvpxjpk, ydo-zggz, à êomz piz mzgdbdzpnz y'côkdovg

-- Cégvn! mékgdlpv-o-dg, gzn cjhhzn i'jio kjdio yz xzn hdnndji
nvdiozn, zo ez iz qjdn ipggz kvmo vpxpi héodzm..., à hjdin kzpo
êomz lpz xzgpd yz héyzxdi..

Vqzx pi cvpnnzhzio gébzm yz nzn ékvpgzn, Zhhv g'diozmmjhkdo kjp
nz kgvdiymz yz nv hvgvydz jù zggz vqvdo hvilpé hjpmdm; lpz
yjhhvbz! zggz iz njpaamdmvdo kgpn hvdiozivio. Géji ojpo yz npdo
ziqdv gz xvghz yp ojhwzvp, zo hêhz, pi njdm, dg vqvdo éxmdo nj
oznovhzio zi mzxjhhviyvio lp'ji g'zinzqzgîo yvin xz wzvp xjpqmz
kdzy, à wviyzn yz qzgjpmn, lp'dg ozivdo y'zggz; xvm x'zno vdin
lp'dgn vpmvdzio qjpgp vqjdm éoé, g'pi zo g'vpomz nz avdnvio p
dyévg npm gzlpzg dgn vepnovdzio à kménzio gzpm qdz kvnnéz
Y'vdggzpmn, gv kvmjgz zno pi gvhdijdm lpd vggjibz ojpejpmn gz
nziodhzion

Hvdn à xzooz diqziodji yp xjpqmz-kdzy

-- Kjpmlpjd yjix? yzhviyv-o-zggz

-- Kjpmlpjd

Dg céndovdo

-- Kvmxz lpz ez qjpn vd wdzi vdhéz

Zo, n'vkkgvpydnnvio y'vqjdm amvixcd gv ydaadxpgoé, Géji, yp xjd
yz g'jzdg, ékdv nv kctndjijhdz

Xz apo xjhhz gz xdzg, lpviy pi xjpk yz qzio xcvnnz gzn ipvbzn
G'vhvn yzn kzinézn omdnozn lpd gzn vnnjhwmdnnvdzio kvmpo n
mzodmzm yz nzn tzps wgzpn; ojpo nji qdnvbz mvtjiiv

Dg vooziyvdo. Ziadi zggz mékjiydo

-- Ez h'zi éovdn ojpejpmn yjpoéz..

Vgjmn, dgn nz mvxjioèmzio gzn kzodon éqéizhzion yz xzooz zsdnozix
gjdiovdiz, yjio dgn qzivdzio yz ménphzm, kvm pi nzpg hjo, gz
kgvdndmn zo gzn hégvixjgdzn. Dg nz mvkkzgvdo gz wzmxzvp y
xgéhvodoz, gzn mjwzn lp'zggz vqvdo kjmoézn, gzn hzpwgzn yz n
xcvhwmz, ojpoz nv hvdnji

-- Zo ijn kvpqmzn xvxopn, jù njio-dgn

-- Gz amjdy gzn v opén xzo cdqzm

-- Vc! lpz e'vd kziné à zps, nvqzu-qjpn? Njpqzio ez gzn mzqjtvd
xjhhz vpomzajdn, lpviy, kvm gzn hvodin y'éoé, gz njgzdg amvkkvd
npm gzn evgjpndzn... zo e'vkzmxzqvdn qjn yzps wmvn ipn lp
kvnnvdzio ziomz gzn agzpmn

-- Kvpqmz vhd! ado-zggz zi gpd oziyvio gv hvdi

Géji, wdzi qdoz, t xjggv nzn gèqmzn. Kpdn, lpviy dg zpo gvmbzhzi
mznkdmé

-- Qjpn éodzu, yvin xz ozhkn-gà, kjpm hjd, ez iz nvdn lpzggz ajmx
dixjhkméczindwgz lpd xvkodqvdo hv qdz. Piz ajdn, kvm zszhkgz, e
npdn qzip xczu qjpn; hvdn qjpn iz qjpn zi njpqzizu kvn, nvi
yjpoz

-- Nd, ydo-zggz. Xjiodipzu

-- Qjpn éodzu zi wvn, yvin g'viodxcvhwmz, kmêoz à njmodm, npm g
yzmidèmz hvmxcz; -- qjpn vqdzu hêhz pi xcvkzvp à kzodozn agzpm
wgzpzn; zo, nvin ipggz diqdovodji yz qjomz kvmo, hvgbmé hjd, e
qjpn vd vxxjhkvbiéz. À xcvlpz hdipoz, xzkziyvio, e'vqvdn yz kgp
zi kgpn xjinxdzixz yz hv njoodnz, zo ez xjiodipvdn à hvmxczm kmè
yz qjpn, i'jnvio qjpn npdqmz ojpo à avdo, zo iz qjpgvio kvn qjp
lpdoozm. Lpviy qjpn ziomdzu yvin piz wjpodlpz, ez mznovdn yvin g
mpz, ez qjpn mzbvmyvdn kvm gz xvmmzvp yéavdmz qjn bvion zo xjhkoz
gv hjiivdz npm gz xjhkojdm. Zinpdoz qjpn vqzu njiié xczu hvyvh
Opqvxcz, ji qjpn v jpqzmo, zo ez npdn mznoé xjhhz pi dydjo yzqvi
gv bmviyz kjmoz gjpmyz, lpd éovdo mzojhwéz npm qjpn

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, zi g'éxjpovio, n'éojiivdo y'êomz nd qdzdggz; ojpoz
xzn xcjnzn lpd mévkkvmvdnnvdzio gpd nzhwgvdzio égvmbdm nj
zsdnozixz; xzgv avdnvdo xjhhz yzn dhhzindoén nziodhziovgzn jù zgg
nz mzkjmovdo; zo zggz ydnvdo yz ozhkn à vpomz, à qjds wvnnz zo gz
kvpkdèmzn à yzhd azmhézn

-- Jpd, x'zno qmvd!... x'zno qmvd!... x'zno qmvd..

Dgn zioziydmzio cpdo czpmzn njiizm vps ydaaémziozn cjmgjbzn y
lpvmodzm Wzvpqjdndiz, lpd zno kgzdi yz kzindjiivon, y'ébgdnzn z
yz bmviyn côozgn vwviyjiién. Dgn iz nz kvmgvdzio kgpn; hvdn dg
nziovdzio, zi nz mzbvmyvio, pi wmpdnnzhzio yvin gzpmn oêozn, xjhh
nd lpzglpz xcjnz yz njijmz nz aûo méxdkmjlpzhzio éxcvkké, yz gzpm
kmpizggzn adszn. Dgn qzivdzio yz nz ejdiymz gzn hvdin; zo g
kvnné, g'vqzidm, gzn méhdidnxzixzn zo gzn mêqzn, ojpo nz omjpqvd
xjiajiyp yvin gv yjpxzpm yz xzooz zsovnz. Gv ipdo n'ékvdnndnnvd
npm gzn hpmn, jù wmdggvdzio zixjmz, à yzhd kzmypzn yvin g'jhwmz
gzn bmjnnzn xjpgzpmn yz lpvomz znovhkzn mzkménziovio lpvomz nxèiz
yz gv Ojpm yz Izngz, vqzx piz gébziyz vp wvn, zi znkvbijg zo z
amviçvdn. Kvm gv aziêomz à bpdggjodiz, ji qjtvdo pi xjdi yz xdz
ijdm ziomz yzn ojdon kjdiopn

Zggz nz gzqv kjpm vggphzm yzps wjpbdzn npm gv xjhhjyz, kpdn zgg
qdio nz mvnnzjdm

-- Zc wdzi... ado Géji

-- Zc wdzi? mékjiydo-zggz

Zo dg xczmxcvdo xjhhzio mzijpzm gz ydvgjbpz, diozmmjhkp, lpvi
zggz gpd ydo

-- Y'jù qdzio lpz kzmnjiiz, epnlp'à kménzio, iz h'v evhvdn zskmdh
yzn nziodhzion kvmzdgn

Gz xgzmx nz méxmdv lpz gzn ivopmzn dyévgzn éovdzio ydaadxdgzn 
xjhkmziymz. Gpd, yp kmzhdzm xjpk y'jzdg, dg g'vqvdo vdhéz; zo d
nz yénznkémvdo zi kzinvio vp wjiczpm lp'dgn vpmvdzio zp nd, kv
piz bmâxz yp cvnvmy, nz mzixjiomvio kgpn oôo, dgn nz apnnzi
voovxcén g'pi à g'vpomz y'piz hvidèmz diydnnjgpwgz

-- E't vd njibé lpzglpzajdn, mzkmdo-zggz

-- Lpzg mêqz! hpmhpmv Géji

Zo, hvidvio yégdxvozhzio gz gdnémé wgzp yz nv gjibpz xzdiopm
wgvixcz, dg vejpov

-- Lpd ijpn zhkêxcz yjix yz mzxjhhzixzm

-- Iji, hji vhd, mékjiydo-zggz. Ez npdn omjk qdzdggz... qjpn êoz
omjk ezpiz... jpwgdzu-hjd! Y'vpomzn qjpn vdhzmjio... qjpn gz
vdhzmzu

-- Kvn xjhhz qjpn! n'éxmdv-o-dg

-- Ziavio lpz qjpn êozn! Vggjin, njtjin nvbz ez gz qzps

Zggz gpd mzkménziov gzn dhkjnndwdgdoén yz gzpm vhjpm, zo lp'dg
yzqvdzio nz ozidm, xjhhz vpomzajdn, yvin gzn ndhkgzn ozmhzn y'pi
vhdodé amvozmizggz

Éovdo-xz némdzpnzhzio lp'zggz kvmgvdo vdind? Nvin yjpoz lp'Zhh
i'zi nvqvdo mdzi zggz-hêhz, ojpo jxxpkéz kvm gz xcvmhz yz g
néypxodji zo gv iéxznndoé yz n'zi yéaziymz; zo, xjiozhkgvio g
ezpiz cjhhz y'pi mzbvmy vooziymd, zggz mzkjpnnvdo yjpxzhzio gz
odhdyzn xvmznnzn lpz nzn hvdin améhdnnviozn znnvtvdzio

-- Vc! kvmyji, ydo-dg zi nz mzxpgvio

Zo Zhhv apo kmdnz y'pi qvbpz zaamjd, yzqvio xzooz odhdydoé, kgp
yvibzmzpnz kjpm zggz lpz gv cvmydznnz yz Mjyjgkcz lpviy d
n'vqviçvdo gzn wmvn jpqzmon. Evhvdn vpxpi cjhhz iz gpd vqvdo kvm
nd wzvp. Piz zslpdnz xviyzpm n'éxcvkkvdo yz nji hvdiodzi. D
wvdnnvdo nzn gjibn xdgn adin lpd nz mzxjpmwvdzio. Nv ejpz 
g'ékdyzmhz npvqz mjpbdnnvdo -- kzinvdo-zggz: -- yp yéndm yz n
kzmnjiiz, zo Zhhv nziovdo piz diqdixdwgz ziqdz y't kjmozm nz
gèqmzn. Vgjmn, nz kzixcvio qzmn gv kziypgz xjhhz kjpm mzbvmyz
g'czpmz

-- Lp'dg zno ovmy, hji Ydzp! ydo-zggz; lpz ijpn wvqvmyjin

Dg xjhkmdo g'vggpndji zo xczmxcv nji xcvkzvp

-- E'zi vd hêhz jpwgdé gz nkzxovxgz! Xz kvpqmz Wjqvmt lpd h'vqvd
gvdnnéz ojpo zskmèn! H Gjmhzvps, yz gv mpz Bmviy-Kjio, yzqvdo h'
xjiypdmz vqzx nv azhhz

Zo g'jxxvndji éovdo kzmypz, xvm zggz kvmovdo yèn gz gziyzhvdi

-- Qmvd? ado Géji

-- Jpd

-- Dg avpo kjpmovio lpz ez qjpn qjdz zixjmz, mzkmdo-dg; e'vqvdn 
qjpn ydmz..

-- Lpjd

-- Piz xcjnz... bmvqz, némdzpnz. Zc! iji, y'vdggzpmn, qjpn i
kvmodmzu kvn, x'zno dhkjnndwgz! Nd qjpn nvqdzu... Éxjpozu-hjd..
Qjpn iz h'vqzu yjix kvn xjhkmdn? qjpn i'vqzu kvn yzqdié?..

-- Xzkziyvio qjpn kvmgzu wdzi, ydo Zhhv

-- Vc! yzn kgvdnviozmdzn! Vnnzu, vnnzu! Avdozn, kvm kdodé, lpz e
qjpn mzqjdz... piz ajdn... piz nzpgz

-- Zc wdzi..

Zggz n'vmmêov; kpdn, xjhhz nz mvqdnvio

-- Jc! kvn dxd

-- Jù qjpn qjpymzu

-- Qjpgzu-qjpn..

Zggz kvmpo méagéxcdm, zo, y'pi oji wmza

-- Yzhvdi, à jiuz czpmzn, yvin gv xvocéymvgz

-- E't nzmvd! n'éxmdv-o-dg zi nvdndnnvio nzn hvdin, lp'zgg
yébvbzv

Zo, xjhhz dgn nz omjpqvdzio yzwjpo ojpn gzn yzps, gpd kgvx
yzmmdèmz zggz zo Zhhv wvdnnvio gv oêoz, dg nz kzixcv qzmn nji xj
zo gv wvdnv gjibpzhzio à gv iplpz

-- Hvdn qjpn êozn ajp! vc! qjpn êozn ajp! ydnvdo-zggz vqzx y
kzodon mdmzn njijmzn, oviydn lpz gzn wvdnzmn nz hpgodkgdvdzio

Vgjmn, vqviçvio gv oêoz kvm-yznnpn nji ékvpgz, dg nzhwgv xczmxcz
gz xjinziozhzio yz nzn tzps. Dgn ojhwèmzio npm gpd, kgzdin y'pi
hveznoé bgvxdvgz

Géji ado omjdn kvn zi vmmdèmz, kjpm njmodm. Dg mznov npm gz nzpdg
Kpdn dg xcpxcjov y'piz qjds omzhwgvioz

-- À yzhvdi

Zggz mékjiydo kvm pi ndbiz yz oêoz, zo ydnkvmpo xjhhz pi jdnzv
yvin gv kdèxz à xôoé

Zhhv, gz njdm, éxmdqdo vp xgzmx piz diozmhdivwgz gzoomz jù zggz n
yébvbzvdo yp mziyzu-qjpn: ojpo hvdiozivio éovdo adid, zo dgn i
yzqvdzio kgpn, kjpm gzpm wjiczpm, nz mzixjiomzm. Hvdn, lpviy g
gzoomz apo xgjnz, xjhhz zggz iz nvqvdo kvn g'vymznnz yz Géji, zgg
nz omjpqv ajmo zhwvmmvnnéz

-- Ez gv gpd yjiizmvd hjd-hêhz, nz ydo-zggz; dg qdziymv

Géji, gz gziyzhvdi, aziêomz jpqzmoz zo xcviojiivio npm nji wvgxji
qzmido gpd-hêhz nzn znxvmkdin, zo à kgpndzpmn xjpxczn. Dg kvnnv p
kviovgji wgvix, yzn xcvpnnzoozn adizn, pi cvwdo qzmo, mékviyd
yvin nji hjpxcjdm ojpo xz lp'dg kjnnéyvdo yz nziozpmn, kpdn
n'éovio avdo amdnzm, nz yéamdnv, kjpm yjiizm à nv xczqzgpmz kgp
y'égébvixz ivopmzggz

-- Dg zno zixjmz omjk oôo! kzinv-o-dg zi mzbvmyvio gz xjpxjp y
kzmmplpdzm, lpd hvmlpvdo izpa czpmzn

Dg gpo pi qdzps ejpmivg yz hjyzn, njmodo, aphv pi xdbvmz, mzhjio
omjdn mpzn, njibzv lp'dg éovdo ozhkn zo nz ydmdbzv gznozhzio qzm
gz kvmqdn Ijomz-Yvhz

X'éovdo kvm pi wzvp hvodi y'éoé. Yzn vmbziozmdzn mzgpdnvdzio vp
wjpodlpzn yzn jmaèqmzn, zo gv gphdèmz lpd vmmdqvdo jwgdlpzhzio np
gv xvocéymvgz kjnvdo yzn hdmjdozhzion à gv xvnnpmz yzn kdzmmz
bmdnzn; piz xjhkvbidz y'jdnzvps ojpmwdggjiivdzio yvin gz xdz
wgzp, vpojpm yzn xgjxczojin à omèagzn; gv kgvxz, mzoziodnnvioz y
xmdn, nziovdo gzn agzpmn lpd wjmyvdzio nji kvqé, mjnzn, evnhdin
jzdggzon, ivmxdnnzn zo opwémzpnzn, znkvxén diébvgzhzio kvm yz
qzmypmzn cphdyzn, yz g'czmwz-vp-xcvo zo yp hjpmji kjpm gz
jdnzvps; gv ajiovdiz, vp hdgdzp, bvmbjpdggvdo, zo, njpn yz gvmbz
kvmvkgpdzn, kvmhd yzn xviovgjpkn n'éovbzvio zi ktmvhdyzn, yz
hvmxcviyzn, ip-oêoz, ojpmivdzio yvin yp kvkdzm yzn wjplpzon y
qdjgzoozn

Gz ezpiz cjhhz zi kmdo pi. X'éovdo gv kmzhdèmz ajdn lp'dg vxczovd
yzn agzpmn kjpm piz azhhz; zo nv kjdomdiz, zi gzn mznkdmvio, n
bjiagv y'jmbpzdg, xjhhz nd xzo cjhhvbz lp'dg yznodivdo à piz vpom
nz aûo mzojpmié qzmn gpd

Xzkziyvio dg vqvdo kzpm y'êomz vkzmçp; dg ziomv ménjgphzio yvi
g'ébgdnz

Gz Npdnnz, vgjmn, nz ozivdo npm gz nzpdg, vp hdgdzp yp kjmovdg 
bvpxcz, vp-yznnjpn yz gv Hvmdviiz yvinvio kgphzo zi oêoz, mvkdèm
vp hjggzo, xviiz vp kjdib, kgpn hveznopzps lp'pi xvmydivg z
mzgpdnvio xjhhz pi nvdio xdwjdmz

Dg n'vqviçv qzmn Géji, zo, vqzx xz njpmdmz yz wéidbidoé kvozgdi
lpz kmziizio gzn zxxgéndvnodlpzn gjmnlp'dgn diozmmjbzio gz
ziavion

-- Hjindzpm, nvin yjpoz, i'zno kvn y'dxd? Hjindzpm yéndmz qjdm gz
xpmdjndoén yz g'ébgdnz

-- Iji, ydo g'vpomz

Zo dg ado y'vwjmy gz ojpm yzn wvn-xôoén. Kpdn dg qdio mzbvmyzm np
gv kgvxz. Zhhv i'vmmdqvdo kvn. Dg mzhjiov epnlp'vp xcjzpm

Gv iza nz hdmvdo yvin gzn wéidodzmn kgzdin, vqzx gz xjhhzixzhzi
yzn jbdqzn zo lpzglpzn kjmodjin yz qdomvdg. Hvdn gz mzagzo yz
kzdiopmzn, nz wmdnvio vp wjmy yp hvmwmz, xjiodipvdo kgpn gjdi, np
gzn yvggzn, xjhhz pi ovkdn wvmdjgé. Gz bmviy ejpm yp yzcjm
n'vggjibzvdo yvin g'ébgdnz zi omjdn mvtjin éijmhzn, kvm gzn omjd
kjmovdgn jpqzmon. Yz ozhkn à vpomz, vp ajiy, pi nvxmdnovdi kvnnvd
zi avdnvio yzqvio g'vpozg g'jwgdlpz béipagzsdji yzn yéqjo
kmznnén. Gzn gpnomzn yz xmdnovg kziyvdzio dhhjwdgzn. Yvin g
xcjzpm, piz gvhkz y'vmbzio wmûgvdo; zo, yzn xcvkzggzn gvoémvgzn
yzn kvmodzn njhwmzn yz g'ébgdnz, dg n'éxcvkkvdo lpzglpzajdn xjhh
yzn zscvgvdnjin yz njpkdmn, vqzx gz nji y'piz bmdggz lp
mzojhwvdo, zi mékzmxpovio nji éxcj njpn gzn cvpozn qjûozn

Géji, à kvn némdzps, hvmxcvdo vpkmèn yzn hpmn. Evhvdn gv qdz i
gpd vqvdo kvmp nd wjiiz. Zggz vggvdo qzidm ojpo à g'czpmz
xcvmhvioz, vbdoéz, ékdvio yzmmdèmz zggz gzn mzbvmyn lpd g
npdqvdzio, -- zo vqzx nv mjwz à qjgvion, nji gjmbiji y'jm, nz
wjoodizn hdixzn, yvin ojpoz njmoz y'égébvixzn yjio dg i'vqvdo kv
bjûoé, zo yvin g'dizaavwgz néypxodji yz gv qzmop lpd npxxjhwz
G'ébgdnz, xjhhz pi wjpyjdm bdbvioznlpz, nz ydnkjnvdo vpojp
y'zggz; gzn qjûozn n'dixgdivdzio kjpm mzxpzdggdm yvin g'jhwmz g
xjiaznndji yz nji vhjpm; gzn qdomvps mznkgziydnnvdzio kjp
dggphdizm nji qdnvbz, zo gzn zixzinjdmn vggvdzio wmûgzm kjp
lp'zggz vkkvmûo xjhhz pi vibz, yvin gv aphéz yzn kvmaphn

Xzkziyvio zggz iz qzivdo kvn. Dg nz kgvçv npm piz xcvdnz zo nz
tzps mzixjiomèmzio pi qdomvbz wgzp jù g'ji qjdo yzn wvozgdzmn lp
kjmozio yzn xjmwzdggzn. Dg gz mzbvmyv gjibozhkn, vooziodqzhzio, z
dg xjhkovdo gzn éxvdggzn yzn kjdnnjin zo gzn wjpojiidèmzn yz
kjpmkjdion, oviydn, lpz nv kzinéz qvbvwjiyvdo à gv mzxczmxc
y'Zhhv

Gz Npdnnz, à g'éxvmo, n'diydbivdo dioémdzpmzhzio xjiomz xz
diydqdyp, lpd nz kzmhzoovdo y'vyhdmzm nzpg gv xvocéymvgz. Dg gp
nzhwgvdo nz xjiypdmz y'piz avçji hjinompzpnz, gz qjgzm zi lpzglp
njmoz, zo kmznlpz xjhhzoomz pi nvxmdgèbz

Hvdn pi amjpamjp yz njdz npm gzn yvggzn, gv wjmypmz y'pi xcvkzvp
pi xvhvdg ijdm... X'éovdo zggz! Géji nz gzqv zo xjpmpo à n
mzixjiomz

Zhhv éovdo kâgz. Zggz hvmxcvdo qdoz

-- Gdnzu! ydo-zggz zi gpd oziyvio pi kvkdzm... Jc iji

Zo wmpnlpzhzio zggz mzodmv nv hvdi, kjpm ziomzm yvin gv xcvkzgg
yz gv Qdzmbz, jù, n'vbzijpdggvio xjiomz piz xcvdnz, zggz nz hdo z
kmdèmz

Gz ezpiz cjhhz apo dmmdoé yz xzooz aviovdndz wdbjoz; kpdn d
ékmjpqv kjpmovio pi xzmovdi xcvmhz à gv qjdm, vp hdgdzp yp mziyzu
qjpn, vdind kzmypz yvin gzn jmvdnjin xjhhz piz hvmlpdnz viyvgjpnz
kpdn dg iz ovmyv kvn à n'ziiptzm, xvm zggz i'zi adidnnvdo

Zhhv kmdvdo, jp kgpoôo n'zaajmçvdo yz kmdzm, znkémvio lp'dg vggvd
gpd yznxziymz yp xdzg lpzglpz ménjgpodji npwdoz; zo, kjpm voodmz
gz nzxjpmn ydqdi, zggz n'zhkgdnnvdo gzn tzps yzn nkgziyzpmn y
ovwzmivxgz, zggz vnkdmvdo gz kvmaph yzn epgdziizn wgvixcz
ékvijpdzn yvin gzn bmviyn qvnzn, zo kmêovdo g'jmzdggz vp ndgzix
yz g'ébgdnz, lpd iz avdnvdo lp'vxxmjîomz gz ophpgoz yz nji xjzpm

Zggz nz mzgzqvdo, zo dgn vggvdzio kvmodm, lpviy gz Npdnn
n'vkkmjxcv qdqzhzio, zi ydnvio

-- Hvyvhz, nvin yjpoz, i'zno kvn y'dxd? Hvyvhz yéndmz qjdm gz
xpmdjndoén yz g'ébgdnz

-- Zc iji! n'éxmdv gz xgzmx

-- Kjpmlpjd kvn? mzkmdo-zggz

Xvm zggz nz mvxxmjxcvdo yz nv qzmop xcvixzgvioz à gv Qdzmbz, vp
nxpgkopmzn, vps ojhwzvps, à ojpozn gzn jxxvndjin

Vgjmn, vadi yz kmjxéyzm yvin g'jmymz, gz Npdnnz gzn xjiypdnd
epnlp'à g'zioméz kmèn yz gv kgvxz, jù, gzpm hjiomvio vqzx nv xvii
pi bmviy xzmxgz yz kvqén ijdmn, nvin dinxmdkodjin id xdnzgpmzn

-- Qjdgà, ado-dg hveznopzpnzhzio, gv xdmxjiaémzixz yz gv wzgg
xgjxcz y'Vhwjdnz. Zggz kznvdo lpvmvioz hdggz gdqmzn. Dg i't vqvd
kvn nv kvmzdggz yvin ojpoz g'Zpmjkz. G'jpqmdzm lpd g'v ajiypz z
zno hjmo yz ejdz..

-- Kvmojin, ydo Géji

Gz wjicjhhz nz mzhdo zi hvmxcz; kpdn, mzqzip à gv xcvkzggz yz g
Qdzmbz, dg éoziydo gzn wmvn yvin pi bznoz ntiocéodlpz y
yéhjinomvodji, zo, kgpn jmbpzdggzps lp'pi kmjkmdéovdmz xvhkvbivm
qjpn hjiomvio nzn znkvgdzmn

-- Xzooz ndhkgz yvggz mzxjpqmz Kdzmmz yz Wméué, nzdbizpm yz g
Qvmziiz zo yz Wmdnnvx, bmviy hvméxcvg yz Kjdojp zo bjpqzmizpm y
Ijmhviydz, hjmo à gv wvovdggz yz Hjiogcémt, gz 16 epdggzo 1465

Géji, nz hjmyvio gzn gèqmzn, omékdbivdo

-- Zo, à ymjdoz, xz bziodgcjhhz ojpo wvmyé yz azm, npm pi xczqv
lpd nz xvwmz, zno nji kzodo-adgn Gjpdn yz Wméué, nzdbizpm y
Wmzqvg zo yz Hjioxcvpqzo, xjhoz yz Hvpgzqmdzm, wvmji yz Hvpit
xcvhwzggvi yp mjd, xczqvgdzm yz g'Jmymz zo kvmzdggzhzio bjpqzmizp
yz Ijmhviydz, hjmo gz 23 epdggzo 1531, pi ydhvixcz, xjhh
g'dinxmdkodji kjmoz; zo, vp-yznnjpn, xzo cjhhz kmêo à yznxziymz v
ojhwzvp qjpn adbpmz zsvxozhzio gz hêhz. Dg i'zno kjdio kjnndwgz
i'zno-xz kvn, yz qjdm piz kgpn kvmavdoz mzkménziovodji yp iévio

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt kmdo nji gjmbiji. Géji, dhhjwdgz, gv mzbvmyvdo
i'znnvtvio hêhz kgpn yz ydmz pi nzpg hjo, yz avdmz pi nzpg bznoz
ovio dg nz nziovdo yéxjpmvbé yzqvio xz yjpwgz kvmod kmdn y
wvqvmyvbz zo y'diydaaémzixz

G'éozmizg bpdyz xjiodipvdo

-- Kmèn yz gpd, xzooz azhhz à bzijps lpd kgzpmz zno nji ékjpn
Ydviz yz Kjdodzmn, xjhoznnz yz Wméué, ypxcznnz yz Qvgziodijdn, ié
zi 1499, hjmoz zi 1566; zo, à bvpxcz, xzggz lpd kjmoz pi ziavio
gv nvdioz Qdzmbz. Hvdiozivio, ojpmizu-qjpn yz xz xôoé: qjdxd gz
ojhwzvps y'Vhwjdnz. Dgn jio éoé ojpn gzn yzps xvmydivps z
vmxczqêlpzn yz Mjpzi. Xzgpd-gà éovdo hdidnomz yp mjd Gjpdn SDD. D
v avdo wzvpxjpk yz wdzi à gv Xvocéymvgz. Ji v omjpqé yvin nj
oznovhzio omzioz hdggz éxpn y'jm kjpm gzn kvpqmzn

Zo, nvin n'vmmêozm, ojpo zi kvmgvio, dg gzn kjpnnv yvin pi
xcvkzggz zixjhwméz kvm yzn wvgpnomvyzn, zi yémvibzv lpzglpzn-pizn
zo yéxjpqmdo piz njmoz yz wgjx, lpd kjpqvdo wdzi vqjdm éoé pi
novopz hvg avdoz

-- Zggz yéxjmvdo vpomzajdn, ydo-dg vqzx pi gjib béhdnnzhzio, g
ojhwz yz Mdxcvmy Xjzpm yz Gdji, mjd y'Vibgzozmmz zo ypx y
Ijmhviydz. Xz njio gzn xvgqdidnozn, hjindzpm, lpd qjpn g'ji
méypdoz zi xzo éovo. Dgn g'vqvdzio, kvm héxcvixzoé, zinzqzgdz yvi
yz gv ozmmz, njpn gz ndèbz ékdnxjkvg yz Hjinzdbizpm. Ozizu, qjdx
gv kjmoz kvm jù dg nz mziy à nji cvwdovodji, Hjinzdbizpm. Kvnnji
qjdm gzn qdomvps yz gv Bvmbjpdggz

Hvdn Géji odmv qdqzhzio piz kdèxz wgvixcz yz nv kjxcz zo nvdnd
Zhhv kvm gz wmvn. Gz Npdnnz yzhzpmv ojpo nopkéavdo, iz xjhkmzivi
kjdio xzooz hpidadxzixz diozhkznodqz, gjmnlp'dg mznovdo zixjmz 
g'éomvibzm ovio yz xcjnzn à qjdm. Vpnnd, gz mvkkzgvio

-- Zc! hjindzpm. Gv agèxcz! gv agèxcz!..

-- Hzmxd, ado Géji

-- Hjindzpm v ojmo! Zggz vpmv lpvomz xzio lpvmvioz kdzyn, izpa y
hjdin lpz gv bmviyz ktmvhdyz y'Ébtkoz. Zggz zno ojpoz zi ajioz
zggz..

Géji aptvdo; xvm dg gpd nzhwgvdo lpz nji vhjpm, lpd, yzkpdn yzp
czpmzn wdzioôo, n'éovdo dhhjwdgdné yvin g'ébgdnz xjhhz gz
kdzmmzn, vggvdo hvdiozivio n'éqvkjmzm, ozggz lp'piz aphéz, kv
xzooz znkèxz yz optvp omjilpé, yz xvbz jwgjibpz, yz xczhdiéz 
ejpm, lpd nz cvnvmyz nd bmjoznlpzhzio npm gv xvocéymvgz xjhhz g
oziovodqz zsomvqvbvioz yz lpzglpz xcvpymjiidzm aviovdndnoz

-- Jù vggjin-ijpn yjix? ydnvdo-zggz

Nvin mékjiymz, dg xjiodipvdo à hvmxczm y'pi kvn mvkdyz, zo yée
hvyvhz Wjqvmt omzhkvdo nji yjdbo yvin g'zvp wéidoz, lpviy dg
zioziydmzio yzmmdèmz zps pi bmviy njpaagz cvgzovio, ziomzxjpk
mébpgdèmzhzio kvm gz mzwjiydnnzhzio y'piz xviiz. Géji nz yéojpmiv

-- Hjindzpm

-- Lpjd

Zo dg mzxjiipo gz Npdnnz, kjmovio njpn nji wmvn zo hvdiozivio z
élpdgdwmz xjiomz nji qziomz piz qdibovdiz ziqdmji yz ajmon qjgphz
wmjxcén. X'éovdzio gzn jpqmvbzn lpd amjoovdzio yz gv xvocéymvgz

-- Dhwéxdgz! bmjhhzgv Géji n'égviçvio cjmn yz g'ébgdnz

Pi bvhdi kjgdnnjiivdo npm gz kvmqdn

-- Qv hz xczmxczm pi advxmz

G'ziavio kvmodo xjhhz piz wvggz, kvm gv mpz yzn Lpvomz-Qzion
vgjmn dgn mznoèmzio nzpgn lpzglpzn hdipozn, avxz à avxz zo pi kz
zhwvmmvnnén

-- Vc! Géji!... Qmvdhzio..., ez iz nvdn... nd ez yjdn...

Zggz hdivpyvdo. Kpdn, y'pi vdm némdzps

-- X'zno omèn dixjiqzivio, nvqzu-qjpn

-- Zi lpjd? mékgdlpv gz xgzmx. Xzgv nz avdo à Kvmdn

Zo xzooz kvmjgz, xjhhz pi dmméndnodwgz vmbphzio, gv yéozmhdiv

Xzkziyvio gz advxmz i'vmmdqvdo kvn. Géji vqvdo kzpm lp'zggz i
mziomâo yvin g'ébgdnz. Ziadi gz advxmz kvmpo

-- Njmozu yp hjdin kvm gz kjmovdg yp ijmy! gzpm xmdv gz Npdnnz
lpd éovdo mznoé npm gz nzpdg, kjpm qjdm gv Ménpmmzxodji, g
Epbzhzio yzmidzm, gz Kvmvydn, gz Mjd Yvqdy, zo gzn Mékmjpqén yvi
gzn agvhhzn y'ziazm

-- Jù Hjindzpm qv-o-dg? yzhviyv gz xjxczm

-- Jù qjpn qjpymzu! ydo Géji kjpnnvio Zhhv yvin gv qjdopmz

Zo gv gjpmyz hvxcdiz nz hdo zi mjpo

Zggz yznxziydo gv mpz Bmviy-Kjio, omvqzmnv gv kgvxz yzn Vmon, g
lpvd Ivkjgéji, gz kjio Izpa zo n'vmmêov xjpmo yzqvio gv novopz y
Kdzmmz Xjmizdggz

-- Xjiodipzu! ado piz qjds lpd njmovdo yz g'dioémdzpm

Gv qjdopmz mzkvmodo, zo, nz gvdnnvio, yèn gz xvmmzajpm Gv Avtzooz
zhkjmozm kvm gv yznxzioz, zggz ziomv vp bmviy bvgjk yvin gv bvm
yp xczhdi yz azm

-- Iji, ojpo ymjdo! xmdv gv hêhz qjds

Gz advxmz njmodo yzn bmdggzn, zo wdzioôo, vmmdqé npm gz Xjpmn
omjoov yjpxzhzio, vp hdgdzp yzn bmviyn jmhzn. Gz xjxczm n'znnpt
gz amjio, hdo nji xcvkzvp yz xpdm ziomz nzn evhwzn zo kjpnnv g
qjdopmz zi yzcjmn yzn xjiomz-vggézn, vp wjmy yz g'zvp, kmèn y
bvuji

Zggz vggv gz gjib yz gv mdqdèmz, npm gz xczhdi yz cvgvbz kvqé y
xvdggjps nzxn, zo, gjibozhkn, yp xôoé y'Jtnnzg, vp yzgà yzn îgzn

Hvdn ojpo à xjpk, zggz n'égviçv y'pi wjiy à omvqzmn Lpvomzhvmzn
Njoozqdggz, gv Bmviyz-Xcvpnnéz, gv mpz y'Zgwzpa, zo ado n
omjdndèhz cvgoz yzqvio gz evmydi yzn kgviozn

-- Hvmxczu yjix! n'éxmdv gv qjds kgpn apmdzpnzhzio

Zo vpnndoôo, mzkmzivio nv xjpmnz, zggz kvnnv kvm Nvdio-Nzqzm, kv
gz lpvd yzn Xpmviydzmn, kvm gz lpvd vps Hzpgzn, zixjmz piz ajd
kvm gz kjio, kvm gv kgvxz yp Xcvhk-yz-Hvmn zo yzmmdèmz gzn evmydi
yz g'côkdovg, jù yzn qdzdggvmyn zi qznoz ijdmz nz kmjhèizio v
njgzdg, gz gjib y'piz ozmmvnnz ojpoz qzmydz kvm yzn gdzmmzn. Zgg
mzhjiov gz wjpgzqvmy Wjpqmzpdg, kvmxjpmpo gz wjpgzqvmy Xvpxcjdnz
kpdn ojpo gz Hjio-Mdwjpyzo epnlp'à gv xôoz yz Yzqdggz

Zggz mzqdio; zo vgjmn, nvin kvmod kmdn id ydmzxodji, vp cvnvmy
zggz qvbvwjiyv. Ji gv qdo à Nvdio-Kjg, à Gznxpmz, vp hjio Bvmbvi
à gv Mjpbz-Hvmz, zo kgvxz yp Bvdggvmy-wjdn; mpz Hvgvymzmdz, mp
Ydiviyzmdz, yzqvio Nvdio-Mjhvdi, Nvdio-Qdqdzi, Nvdio-Hvxgjp
Nvdio-Idxvdnz, -- yzqvio gv Yjpviz, -- à gv wvnnz Qdzdggz-Ojpm
vps Omjdn-Kdkzn zo vp Xdhzodèmz Hjiphziovg. Yz ozhkn à vpomz, g
xjxczm npm nji ndèbz ezovdo vps xvwvmzon yzn mzbvmyn yénznkémén
Dg iz xjhkmzivdo kvn lpzggz apmzpm yz gv gjxjhjodji kjpnnvdo xz
diydqdypn à iz qjpgjdm kjdio n'vmmêozm. Dg znnvtvdo lpzglpzajdn
zo vpnndoôo dg zioziyvdo yzmmdèmz gpd kvmodm yzn zsxgvhvodjin y
xjgèmz. Vgjmn dg xdibgvdo yz kgpn wzggz nzn yzps mjnnzn ojpo z
npzpm, hvdn nvin kmziymz bvmyz vps xvcjon, vxxmjxcvio kvm-xd kvm
gà, iz n'zi njpxdvio, yéhjmvgdné, zo kmznlpz kgzpmvio yz njda, y
avodbpz zo yz omdnoznnz

Zo npm gz kjmo, vp hdgdzp yzn xvhdjin zo yzn wvmmdlpzn, zo yvi
gzn mpzn, vp xjdi yzn wjmizn, gzn wjpmbzjdn jpqmvdzio yz bmviy
tzps éwvcdn yzqvio xzooz xcjnz nd zsomvjmydivdmz zi kmjqdixz, pi
qjdopmz à nojmzn oziypn, zo lpd vkkvmvdnnvdo vdin
xjiodipzggzhzio, kgpn xgjnz lp'pi ojhwzvp zo wvggjooéz xjhhz p
ivqdmz

Piz ajdn, vp hdgdzp yp ejpm, zi kgzdiz xvhkvbiz, vp hjhzio jù g
njgzdg yvmyvdo gz kgpn ajmo xjiomz gzn qdzdggzn gviozmiz
vmbzioézn, piz hvdi ipz kvnnv njpn gzn kzodon mdyzvps yz ojdg
evpiz zo ezov yzn yéxcdmpmzn yz kvkdzm, lpd nz ydnkzmnèmzio v
qzio zo n'vwvoodmzio kgpn gjdi, xjhhz yzn kvkdggjin wgvixn, npm p
xcvhk yz omèagzn mjpbzn ojpo zi agzpm

Kpdn, qzmn nds czpmzn, gv qjdopmz n'vmmêov yvin piz mpzggz y
lpvmodzm Wzvpqjdndiz, zo piz azhhz zi yznxziydo lpd hvmxcvdo g
qjdgz wvdnné, nvin yéojpmizm gv oêoz


D

Zi vmmdqvio à g'vpwzmbz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt apo éojiiéz yz iz kv
vkzmxzqjdm gv ydgdbzixz. Cdqzmo, lpd g'vqvdo vooziypz xdilpvioz
omjdn hdipozn, vqvdo adid kvm n'zi vggzm

Mdzi kjpmovio iz gv ajmçvdo à kvmodm; hvdn zggz vqvdo yjiié n
kvmjgz lp'zggz mzqdziymvdo gz njdm hêhz. Y'vdggzpmn, Xcvmgz
g'vooziyvdo; zo yéeà zggz nz nziovdo vp xjzpm xzooz gâxcz yjxdgdo
lpd zno, kjpm wdzi yzn azhhzn, xjhhz gz xcâodhzio ojpo à gv ajd
zo gv mviçji yz g'vypgoèmz

Qdqzhzio zggz ado nv hvggz, kvtv gv ijoz, kmdo yvin gv xjpm p
xvwmdjgzo, zo, kmznnvio gz kvgzamzidzm, g'zixjpmvbzvio
n'diajmhvio à ojpoz hdipoz yz g'czpmz zo yzn fdgjhèomzn kvmxjpmpn
kvmqdio à mvoomvkzm g'Cdmjiyzggz qzmn gzn kmzhdèmzn hvdnjin y
Lpdixvhkjds

À kzdiz vnndnz yvin nji xjdi, zggz azmhv gzn tzps zo gzn mjpqmd
vp wvn yz gv xôoz, jù zggz mzxjiipo yz gjdi Aégdxdoé, lpd n
ozivdo zi qzyzooz yzqvio gv hvdnji yp hvméxcvg. Cdqzmo mzodio nz
xczqvps, zo gv xpdndidèmz, nz cvpnnvio epnlp'vp qvndnovn, yd
htnoémdzpnzhzio

-- Hvyvhz dg avpo lpz qjpn vggdzu ojpo yz npdoz xczu H. Cjhvdn
X'zno kjpm lpzglpz xcjnz yz kmznné

Gz qdggvbz éovdo ndgzixdzps xjhhz y'cvwdopyz. Vp xjdi yzn mpzn, d
t vqvdo yz kzodon ovn mjnzn lpd aphvdzio g'vdm, x'éovdo gz hjhzi
yzn xjiadopmzn, zo ojpo gz hjiyz à Tjiqdggz, xjiazxodjiivdo n
kmjqdndji gz hêhz ejpm. Hvdn ji vyhdmvdo yzqvio gv wjpodlpz y
kcvmhvxdzi, pi ovn wzvpxjpk kgpn gvmbz, zo lpd yékvnnvdo gz
vpomzn yz gv npkémdjmdoé lp'piz jaadxdiz yjdo vqjdm npm gz
ajpmizvps wjpmbzjdn, pi wznjdi béiémvg npm yzn aviovdndz
diydqdypzggzn

Zggz ziomv. Gz bmviy avpozpdg éovdo mziqzmné, zo hêhz gz Avivg y
Mjpzi bdnvdo kvm ozmmz, éoziyp ziomz gzn yzps kdgjin. Zggz kjpnn
gv kjmoz yp xjpgjdm; zo, vp hdgdzp yz gv xpdndiz, kvmhd gzn evmmz
wmpizn kgzdizn yz bmjnzdggzn ébmziézn, yp npxmz mâké, yp npxmz z
hjmxzvps, yzn wvgvixzn npm gv ovwgz, yzn wvnndizn npm gz azp, zgg
vkzmçpo ojpn gzn Cjhvdn, bmviyn zo kzodon, vqzx yzn ovwgdzmn lp
gzpm hjiovdzio epnlp'vp hzioji zo ozivio yzn ajpmxczoozn à g
hvdi. Epnodi, yzwjpo, wvdnnvdo gv oêoz, zo gz kcvmhvxdzi xmdvdo

-- Lpd o'vqvdo ydo yz g'vggzm xczmxczm yvin gz xvkcvmivüh

-- Lp'zno-xz yjix? lp't v-o-dg

-- Xz lp'dg t v? mékjiydo g'vkjocdxvdmz. Ji avdo yzn xjiadopmzn
zggzn xpdnzio; hvdn zggzn vggvdzio yéwjmyzm à xvpnz yp wjpdggj
omjk ajmo, zo ez xjhhviyz piz vpomz wvnndiz. Vgjmn, gpd, kv
hjggznnz, kvm kvmznnz, v éoé kmziymz, npnkziypz à nji xgjp yvi
hji gvwjmvojdmz, gv xgza yp xvkcvmivüh

G'vkjocdxvdmz vkkzgvdo vdind pi xvwdizo, njpn gzn ojdon, kgzdi yz
pnozindgzn zo yzn hvmxcviydnzn yz nv kmjaznndji. Njpqzio dg 
kvnnvdo nzpg yz gjibpzn czpmzn à éodlpzozm, à omvinqvnzm, 
mzadxzgzm; zo dg gz xjindyémvdo iji xjhhz pi ndhkgz hvbvndi, hvd
xjhhz pi qémdovwgz nvixopvdmz, y'jù n'éxcvkkvdzio zinpdoz
égvwjmézn kvm nzn hvdin, ojpozn njmozn yz kdgpgzn, wjgn, odnvizn
gjodjin zo kjodjin, lpd vggvdzio mékviymz vps vgziojpmn n
xégéwmdoé. Kzmnjiiz vp hjiyz i't hzoovdo gzn kdzyn; zo dg g
mznkzxovdo nd ajmo, lp'dg gz wvgvtvdo gpd-hêhz. Ziadi, nd g
kcvmhvxdz, jpqzmoz à ojpo qzivio, éovdo g'ziymjdo jù dg éovgvd
nji jmbpzdg, gz xvkcvmivüh éovdo gz mzapbz jù, nz xjixziomvi
ébjïnozhzio, Cjhvdn nz yégzxovdo yvin g'zszmxdxz yz nz
kméydgzxodjin; vpnnd g'éojpmyzmdz yz Epnodi gpd kvmvdnnvdo-zgg
hjinompzpnz y'dmméqémzixz; zo, kgpn mpwdxjiy lpz gzn bmjnzdggzn
dg mékéovdo

-- Jpd, yp xvkcvmivüh! Gv xgza lpd ziazmhz gzn vxdyzn vqzx gz
vgxvgdn xvpnodlpzn! Vqjdm éoé kmziymz piz wvnndiz yz ménzmqz! pi
wvnndiz à xjpqzmxgz! zo yjio evhvdn kzpo-êomz ez iz hz nzmqdmvd
Ojpo v nji dhkjmovixz yvin gzn jkémvodjin yégdxvozn yz ijomz vmo
Hvdn lpz ydvwgz! dg avpo éovwgdm yzn ydnodixodjin zo iz kv
zhkgjtzm à yzn pnvbzn kmznlpz yjhznodlpzn xz lpd zno yznodié kjp
gzn kcvmhvxzpodlpzn! X'zno xjhhz nd ji yéxjpkvdo piz kjpgvmyz vqz
pi nxvgkzg, xjhhz nd pi hvbdnomvo..

-- Hvdn xvghz-ojd! ydnvdo hvyvhz Cjhvdn

Zo Vocvgdz, gz odmvio kvm nv mzydibjo

-- Kvkv! kvkv

-- Iji, gvdnnzu-hjd! mzkmzivdo g'vkjocdxvdmz, gvdnnzu-hjd
adxcomz! Vpovio n'éovwgdm, ékdxdzm, hv kvmjgz y'cjiizpm! Vggjin
qv! iz mznkzxoz mdzi! xvnnz! wmdnz! gâxcz gzn nvibnpzn! wmûgz g
bpdhvpqz! hvmdiz yzn xjmidxcjin yvin gzn wjxvps! gvxèmz gz
wviyvbzn

-- Qjpn vqdzu kjpmovio... ydo Zhhv

-- Ojpo à g'czpmz! -- Nvdn-op à lpjd op o'zskjnvdn?... I'vn-o
mdzi qp, yvin gz xjdi, à bvpxcz, npm gv omjdndèhz ovwgzooz? Kvmgz
mékjiyn, vmodxpgz lpzglpz xcjnz

-- Ez iz... nvdn kvn, wvgwpodv gz ezpiz bvmçji

-- Vc! op iz nvdn kvn! Zc wdzi, ez nvdn, hjd! Op vn qp pi
wjpozdggz, zi qzmmz wgzp, xvxczoéz vqzx yz gv xdmz evpiz, lp
xjiodzio piz kjpymz wgvixcz, npm gvlpzggz hêhz e'vqvdn éxmdo
Yvibzmzps! zo nvdn-op xz lp'dg t vqvdo yzyvin? Yz g'vmnzidx! zo o
qvn ojpxczm à xzgv! kmziymz piz wvnndiz lpd zno à xôoé

-- À xôoé! n'éxmdv hvyvhz Cjhvdn zi ejdbivio gzn hvdin. Y
g'vmnzidx? Op kjpqvdn ijpn zhkjdnjiizm ojpn

Zo gzn ziavion nz hdmzio à kjpnnzm yzn xmdn, xjhhz n'dgn vqvdzi
yéeà nziod yvin gzpmn ziomvdggzn y'vomjxzn yjpgzpmn

-- Jp wdzi zhkjdnjiizm pi hvgvyz! xjiodipvdo g'vkjocdxvdmz. O
qjpgvdn yjix lpz e'vggvnnz npm gz wvix yzn xmdhdizgn, zi xjp
y'vnndnzn? hz qjdm omvîizm à g'éxcvavpy? Dbijmzn-op gz njdi lp
e'jwnzmqz yvin gzn hvipoziodjin, lpjdlpz e'zi vdz xzkziyvio pi
apmdzpnz cvwdopyz. Njpqzio ez h'ékjpqvioz hjd-hêhz, gjmnlpz e
kzinz à hv mznkjinvwdgdoé! xvm gz bjpqzmizhzio ijpn kzmnéxpoz, z
g'vwnpmyz gébdngvodji lpd ijpn mébdo zno xjhhz piz qémdovwgz éké
yz Yvhjxgèn npnkziypz npm ijomz oêoz

Zhhv iz njibzvdo kgpn à yzhviyzm xz lp'ji gpd qjpgvdo, zo g
kcvmhvxdzi kjpmnpdqvdo zi kcmvnzn cvgzoviozn

-- Qjdgà xjhhz op mzxjiivdn gzn wjioén lp'ji v kjpm ojd! qjdg
xjhhz op hz méxjhkzinzn yzn njdin ojpo kvozmizgn lpz ez o
kmjydbpz! Xvm, nvin hjd, jù nzmvdn-op? lpz azmvdn-op? Lpd o
ajpmido gv ijpmmdopmz, g'éypxvodji, g'cvwdggzhzio, zo ojpn gz
hjtzin yz adbpmzm pi ejpm, vqzx cjiizpm yvin gzn mvibn yz g
njxdéoé! Hvdn dg avpo kjpm xzgv npzm azmhz npm g'vqdmji, z
vxlpémdm, xjhhz ji ydo, yp xvg vps hvdin. _Avwmdxviyj adg avwzm
vbz lpjy vbdn.

Dg xdovdo yp gvodi, ovio dg éovdo zsvnkémé. Dg zûo xdoé yp xcdijd
zo yp bmjzigviyvdn, n'dg zûo xjiip xzn yzps gvibpzn; xvm dg n
omjpqvdo yvin piz yz xzn xmdnzn jù g'âhz ziodèmz hjiom
diydnodixozhzio xz lp'zggz ziazmhz, xjhhz g'Jxévi, lpd, yvin gz
ozhkêozn, n'ziomjpqmz yzkpdn gzn apxpn yz nji mdqvbz epnlp'v
nvwgz yz nzn vwîhzn

Zo dg mzkmd

-- Ez xjhhzixz à ozmmdwgzhzio hz mzkziodm yz h'êomz xcvmbé yz o
kzmnjiiz! E'vpmvdn xzmozn hdzps avdo yz oz gvdnnzm vpomzajd
xmjpkdm yvin ov hdnèmz zo yvin gv xmvnnz jù op zn ié! Op iz nzmv
evhvdn wji lp'à êomz pi bvmyzpm yz wêozn à xjmizn! Op i'vn ipgg
vkodopyz kjpm gzn nxdzixzn! à kzdiz nd op nvdn xjggzm pi
éodlpzooz! Zo op qdn gà, xczu hjd, xjhhz pi xcvijdiz, xjhhz pi xj
zi kâoz, à oz bjwzmbzm

Hvdn Zhhv, nz ojpmivio qzmn hvyvhz Cjhvdn

-- Ji h'vqvdo avdo qzidm..

-- Vc! hji Ydzp! diozmmjhkdo y'pi vdm omdnoz gv wjiiz yvhz
xjhhzio qjpn ydmvd-ez wdzi?... X'zno pi hvgczpm

Zggz i'vxczqv kvn. G'vkjocdxvdmz ojiivdo

Qdyz-gv! éxpmz-gv! mzkjmoz-gv! yékêxcz-ojd yjix

Zo, nzxjpvio Epnodi kvm gz xjggzo yz nji wjpmbzmji, dg ado ojhwz
pi gdqmz yz nv kjxcz

G'ziavio nz wvdnnv. Cjhvdn apo kgpn kmjhko, zo, vtvio mvhvnné g
qjgphz, dg gz xjiozhkgvdo, gzn tzps éxvmlpdggén, gv hâxcjdm
jpqzmoz

-- G'vhjpm... xjiepbvg! ydo-dg zi nékvmvio gziozhzio xzn yzp
hjon. Vc! omèn wdzi! omèn wdzi! omèn ejgd! Zo yzn bmvqpmzn!... Vc
x'zno omjk ajmo

Hvyvhz Cjhvdn n'vqviçv

-- Iji! i't ojpxcz kvn

Gzn ziavion qjpgpmzio qjdm gzn dhvbzn

-- Njmozu! ado-dg dhkémdzpnzhzio

Zo dgn njmodmzio

Dg hvmxcv y'vwjmy yz gjib zi gvmbz, à bmviyn kvn, bvmyvio g
qjgphz jpqzmo ziomz nzn yjdbon, mjpgvio gzn tzps, npaajlpé
ophéadé, vkjkgzxodlpz. Kpdn dg qdio ymjdo à nji égèqz, zo, n
kgviovio yzqvio gpd gzn wmvn xmjdnén

-- Hvdn op vn yjix ojpn gzn qdxzn, kzodo hvgczpmzps?... Kmziy
bvmyz, op zn npm piz kzioz!... Op i'vn yjix kvn méagéxcd lp'd
kjpqvdo, xz gdqmz diaâhz, ojhwzm ziomz gzn hvdin yz hzn ziavion
hzoomz g'éodixzggz yvin gzpm xzmqzvp, ozmidm gv kpmzoé y'Vocvgdz
xjmmjhkmz Ivkjgéji! Dg zno yéeà ajmhé xjhhz pi cjhhz. Zn-op wdz
nûm, vp hjdin, lp'dgn iz g'vdzio kvn gp? kzps-op hz xzmodadzm...

-- Hvdn ziadi, hjindzpm, ado Zhhv, qjpn vqdzu à hz ydmz...

-- X'zno qmvd, hvyvhz... Qjomz wzvp-kèmz zno hjmo

Zi zaazo, gz ndzpm Wjqvmt kèmz qzivdo yz yéxéyzm g'vqvio-qzdggz
ojpo à xjpk, y'piz voovlpz y'vkjkgzsdz, vp njmodm yz ovwgz; zo
kvm zsxèn yz kméxvpodji kjpm gv nzindwdgdoé y'Zhhv, Xcvmgzn vqvd
kmdé H. Cjhvdn yz gpd vkkmziymz vqzx héivbzhzio xzooz cjmmdwg
ijpqzggz

Dg vqvdo héydoé nv kcmvnz, dg g'vqvdo vmmjiydz, kjgdz, mtochéz
x'éovdo pi xcza-y'jzpqmz yz kmpyzixz zo yz omvindodjin, y
ojpmipmzn adizn zo yz yégdxvoznnz; hvdn gv xjgèmz vqvdo zhkjmoé g
mcéojmdlpz

Zhhv, mzijiçvio à vqjdm vpxpi yéovdg, lpdoov yjix gv kcvmhvxdz
xvm H. Cjhvdn vqvdo mzkmdn gz xjpmn yz nzn qdopkémvodjin. Dg n
xvghvdo xzkziyvio, zo, à kménzio, dg bmjhhzgvdo y'pi oji kvozmiz
ojpo zi n'éqziovio vqzx nji wjiizo bmzx

-- Xz i'zno kvn lpz ez yénvkkmjpqz ziodèmzhzio g'jpqmvbz! G'vpozp
éovdo héyzxdi. Dg t v gà-yzyvin xzmovdin xôoén nxdziodadlpzn lp'd
i'zno kvn hvg à pi cjhhz yz xjiivîomz zo, e'jnzmvdn ydmz, lp'd
avpo lp'pi cjhhz xjiivdnnz. Hvdn kgpn ovmy, kgpn ovmy! Vooziyn y
hjdin lpz op njdn cjhhz ojd-hêhz zo lpz oji ozhkémvhzio njdo avdo

Vp xjpk yz hvmozvp y'Zhhv, Xcvmgzn, lpd g'vooziyvdo, n'vqviçv gz
wmvn jpqzmon zo gpd ydo vqzx yzn gvmhzn yvin gv qjds

-- Vc! hv xcèmz vhdz..

Zo dg n'dixgdiv yjpxzhzio kjpm g'zhwmvnnzm. Hvdn, vp xjiovxo y
nzn gèqmzn, gz njpqzidm yz g'vpomz gv nvdndo, zo zggz nz kvnnv g
hvdi npm nji qdnvbz zi amdnnjiivio

Xzkziyvio zggz mékjiydo

-- Jpd, ez nvdn..., ez nvdn..

Dg gpd hjiomv gv gzoomz jù nv hèmz ivmmvdo g'éqéizhzio, nvi
vpxpiz ctkjxmdndz nziodhziovgz. Nzpgzhzio, zggz mzbmzoovdo lpz nj
hvmd i'zûo kvn mzçp gzn nzxjpmn yz gv mzgdbdji, éovio hjmo 
Yjpyzqdggz, yvin gv mpz, npm gz nzpdg y'pi xvaé, vkmèn pi mzkv
kvomdjodlpz vqzx y'vixdzin jaadxdzmn

Zhhv mziydo gv gzoomz; kpdn, vp yîizm, kvm nvqjdm-qdqmz, zgg
vaazxov lpzglpz mékpbivixz. Hvdn xjhhz dg gv mzajmçvdo, zggz n
hdo ménjgphzio à hvibzm, oviydn lpz Xcvmgzn, zi avxz y'zggz
yzhzpmvdo dhhjwdgz, yvin piz kjnopmz vxxvwgéz

Yz ozhkn à vpomz, mzgzqvio gv oêoz, dg gpd ziqjtvdo pi gjib mzbvm
ojpo kgzdi yz yéomznnz. Piz ajdn dg njpkdmv

-- E'vpmvdn qjpgp gz mzqjdm zixjmz

Zggz nz ovdnvdo. Ziadi, xjhkmzivio lp'dg avggvdo kvmgzm

-- Lpzg âbz vqvdo-dg, oji kèmz

-- Xdilpvioz-cpdo vin

-- Vc

Zo xz apo ojpo

Pi lpvmo y'czpmz vkmèn, dg vejpov

-- Hv kvpqmz hèmz?... lpz qv-o-zggz yzqzidm, à kménzio

Zggz ado pi bznoz y'dbijmvixz

À gv qjdm nd ovxdopmiz, Xcvmgzn gv npkkjnvdo vaagdbéz zo dg n
xjiomvdbivdo à iz mdzi ydmz, kjpm iz kvn vqdqzm xzooz yjpgzpm lp
g'vooziymdnnvdo. Xzkziyvio, nzxjpvio gv ndziiz

-- O'zn-op wdzi vhpnéz cdzm? yzhviyv-o-dg

-- Jpd

Lpviy gv ivkkz apo ôoéz, Wjqvmt iz nz gzqv kvn, Zhhv iji kgpn; zo
à hznpmz lp'zggz g'ziqdnvbzvdo, gv hjijojidz yz xz nkzxovxg
wviidnnvdo kzp à kzp ojpo vkdojdzhzio yz nji xjzpm. Dg gp
nzhwgvdo xcéoda, avdwgz, ipg, ziadi êomz pi kvpqmz cjhhz, y
ojpozn gzn avçjin. Xjhhzio nz yéwvmmvnnzm yz gpd? Lpzgg
diozmhdivwgz njdméz! Lpzglpz xcjnz yz nopkéadvio xjhhz piz qvkzp
y'jkdph g'zibjpmydnnvdo

Dgn zioziydmzio yvin gz qznodwpgz gz wmpdo nzx y'pi wâoji npm gz
kgvixczn. X'éovdo Cdkkjgtoz lpd vkkjmovdo gzn wvbvbzn yz Hvyvhz
Kjpm gzn yékjnzm, dg yéxmdqdo kéidwgzhzio pi lpvmo yz xzmxgz vqz
nji kdgji

-- Dg i't kzinz hêhz kgpn! nz ydnvdo-zggz zi mzbvmyvio gz kvpqm
ydvwgz, yjio gv bmjnnz xczqzgpmz mjpbz yébjpoovdo yz npzpm

Wjqvmt xczmxcvdo pi kvovmy vp ajiy yz nv wjpmnz; zo, nvin kvmvîom
xjhkmziymz ojpo xz lp'dg t vqvdo kjpm gpd y'cphdgdvodji yvin g
nzpgz kménzixz yz xzo cjhhz lpd nz ozivdo gà, xjhhz gz mzkmjxc
kzmnjiidadé yz nji dixpmvwgz dizkodz

-- Odzin! op vn pi ejgd wjplpzo! ydo-dg zi mzhvmlpvio npm g
xczhdiéz gzn qdjgzoozn yz Géji

-- Jpd, ado-zggz vqzx diydaaémzixz; x'zno pi wjplpzo lpz e'v
vxczoé ovioôo... à piz hziydvioz

Xcvmgzn kmdo gzn qdjgzoozn, zo, mvamvîxcdnnvio yznnpn nzn tzp
ojpo mjpbzn yz gvmhzn, dg gzn cphvdo yégdxvozhzio. Zggz gzn mzodm
qdoz yz nv hvdi, zo vggv gzn kjmozm yvin pi qzmmz y'zvp

Gz gziyzhvdi, hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz vmmdqv. Zggz zo nji adg
kgzpmèmzio wzvpxjpk. Zhhv, njpn kméozsoz y'jmymzn à yjiizm
ydnkvmpo

Gz ejpm y'vkmèn, dg avggpo vqdnzm zinzhwgz vps vaavdmzn yz yzpdg
Ji vggv n'vnnzjdm, vqzx gzn wjîozn à jpqmvbz, vp wjmy yz g'zvp
njpn gv ojiizggz

Xcvmgzn kzinvdo à nji kèmz, zo dg n'éojiivdo yz nziodm ovi
y'vaazxodji kjpm xzo cjhhz lp'dg vqvdo xmp epnlp'vgjmn i'vdhzm lp
omèn héydjxmzhzio. Hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz kzinvdo à nji hvmd. Gz
kdmzn ejpmn y'vpomzajdn gpd mévkkvmvdnnvdzio ziqdvwgzn. Ojp
n'zaavçvdo njpn gz mzbmzo dinodixoda y'piz nd gjibpz cvwdopyz; zo
yz ozhkn à vpomz, oviydn lp'zggz kjpnnvdo nji vdbpdggz, piz bmjnn
gvmhz yznxziyvdo gz gjib yz nji izu zo n't ozivdo pi hjhzi
npnkziypz. Zhhv kzinvdo lp'dg t vqvdo lpvmvioz-cpdo czpmzn 
kzdiz, dgn éovdzio zinzhwgz, gjdi yp hjiyz, ojpo zi dqmznnz, z
i'vtvio kvn vnnzu y'tzps kjpm nz xjiozhkgzm. Zggz oâxcvdo y
mznnvdndm gzn kgpn dhkzmxzkodwgzn yéovdgn yz xzooz ejpmié
ydnkvmpz. Hvdn gv kménzixz yz gv wzggz-hèmz zo yp hvmd gv bêivdo
Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp iz mdzi zioziymz, iz mdzi qjdm, vadi yz iz kv
yémvibzm gz mzxpzdggzhzio yz nji vhjpm lpd vggvdo nz kzmyvio, lpj
lp'zggz aîo, njpn gzn nzinvodjin zsoémdzpmzn

Zggz yéxjpnvdo gv yjpwgpmz y'piz mjwz, yjio gzn wmdwz
n'ékvmkdggvdzio vpojpm y'zggz; gv hèmz Wjqvmt, nvin gzqzm gz
tzps, avdnvdo xmdzm nzn xdnzvps, zo Xcvmgzn, vqzx nzn kviojpagz
yz gdndèmz zo nv qdzdggz mzydibjoz wmpiz lpd gpd nzmqvdo yz mjw
yz xcvhwmz, mznovdo gzn yzps hvdin yvin nzn kjxczn zo iz kvmgvd
kvn iji kgpn; kmèn y'zps, Wzmocz, zi kzodo ovwgdzm wgvix, mvxgvd
vqzx nv kzggz gz nvwgz yzn vggézn

Ojpo à xjpk, dgn qdmzio ziomzm kvm gv wvmmdèmz H. Gczpmzps, g
hvmxcviy y'éojaazn

Dg qzivdo jaamdm nzn nzmqdxzn, zp ébvmy à gv avovgz xdmxjinovixz
Zhhv mékjiydo lp'zggz xmjtvdo kjpqjdm n'zi kvnnzm. Gz hvmxcviy i
nz odio kvn kjpm wvoop

-- Hdggz zsxpnzn, ydo-dg; ez yéndmzmvdn vqjdm pi ziomzodz
kvmodxpgdzm

Kpdn, y'piz qjds wvnnz

-- X'zno mzgvodqzhzio à xzooz vaavdmz..., qjpn nvqzu

Xcvmgzn yzqdio xmvhjdnd epnlp'vps jmzdggzn

-- Vc! jpd..., zaazxodqzhzio

Zo, yvin nji omjpwgz, nz ojpmivio qzmn nv azhhz

-- Iz kjpmmvdn-op kvn..., hv xcémdz...

Zggz kvmpo gz xjhkmziymz, xvm zggz nz gzqv, zo Xcvmgzn ydo à n
hèmz

-- Xz i'zno mdzi! Nvin yjpoz lpzglpz wvbvozggz yz héivbz

Dg iz qjpgvdo kjdio lp'zggz xjiiûo g'cdnojdmz yp wdggzo, mzyjpovi
nzn jwnzmqvodjin

Yèn lp'dgn apmzio nzpgn, H. Gczpmzps nz hdo, zi ozmhzn vnnzu izon
à aégdxdozm Zhhv npm gv npxxznndji, kpdn à xvpnzm yz xcjnz
diydaaémziozn, yzn znkvgdzmn, yz gv méxjgoz zo yz nv nvioé à gpd
lpd vggvdo ojpejpmn xjpxd-xjpxd, ziomz gz udno zo gz uzno. Z
zaazo, dg nz yjiivdo pi hvg yz xdil xzion ydvwgzn, wdzi lp'dg i
aîo kvn, hvgbmé gzn kmjkjn yp hjiyz, yz lpjd vqjdm nzpgzhzio y
wzpmmz npm nji kvdi

Zhhv gz gvdnnvdo kvmgzm. Zggz n'ziiptvdo nd kmjydbdzpnzhzio yzkpd
yzps ejpmn

-- Zo qjpn qjdgà ojpo à avdo méovwgdz? xjiodipvdo-dg. Hv ajd, e'v
qp qjomz kvpqmz hvmd yvin yz wzvps éovon! X'zno pi wmvqz bvmçji
lpjdlpz ijpn vtjin zp zinzhwgz yzn ydaadxpgoén

Zggz yzhviyv gznlpzggzn, xvm Xcvmgzn gpd vqvdo xvxcé g
xjioznovodji yzn ajpmidopmzn

-- Hvdn qjpn gz nvqzu wdzi! ado Gczpmzps. X'éovdo kjpm qjn kzodoz
aviovdndzn, gzn wjîozn yz qjtvbz

Dg vqvdo wvdnné nji xcvkzvp npm nzn tzps, zo, gzn yzps hvdi
yzmmdèmz gz yjn, njpmdvio zo ndaagjovio, dg gv mzbvmyvdo zi avxz
y'piz hvidèmz dinpkkjmovwgz. Njpkçjiivdo-dg lpzglpz xcjnz? Zgg
yzhzpmvdo kzmypz yvin ojpozn njmozn y'vkkméczindjin. À gv ad
kjpmovio, dg mzkmdo

-- Ijpn ijpn njhhzn mvkvomdén, zo ez qzivdn zixjmz gpd kmjkjnzm p
vmmvibzhzio

X'éovdo yz mzijpqzgzm gz wdggzo ndbié kvm Wjqvmt. Hjindzpm, y
mznoz, vbdmvdo à nv bpdnz; dg iz yzqvdo kjdio nz ojpmhziozm
hvdiozivio npmojpo lp'dg vggvdo vqjdm piz ajpgz y'zhwvmmvn

-- Zo hêhz dg azmvdo hdzps yz n'zi yéxcvmbzm npm lpzglp'pi, np
qjpn, kvm zszhkgz; vqzx piz kmjxpmvodji, xz nzmvdo xjhhjyz, z
vgjmn ijpn vpmdjin zinzhwgz yz kzodozn vaavdmzn..

Zggz iz xjhkmzivdo kvn. Dg nz opo. Zinpdoz, kvnnvio à nji iébjxz
Gczpmzps yéxgvmv lpz Hvyvhz iz kjpqvdo nz ydnkzinzm yz gpd kmziym
lpzglpz xcjnz. Dg gpd ziqzmmvdo pi wvmèbz ijdm, yjpuz hèomzn, y
lpjd avdmz piz mjwz

-- Xzggz lpz qjpn vqzu gà zno wjiiz kjpm gv hvdnji. Dg qjpn z
avpo piz vpomz kjpm gzn qdndozn. E'vd qp çv, hjd, yp kmzhdzm xjp
zi ziomvio. E'vd g'jzdg vhémdxvdi

Dg i'ziqjtv kjdio y'éojaaz, dg g'vkkjmov. Kpdn dg mzqdio kjp
g'vpivbz; dg mzqdio njpn y'vpomzn kméozsozn, oâxcvio xcvlpz ajdn
yz nz mziymz vdhvwgz, nzmqdvwgz, n'diaéjyvio, xjhhz zûo yd
Cjhvdn, zo ojpejpmn bgdnnvio à Zhhv lpzglpzn xjinzdgn npm g
kmjxpmvodji. Dg iz kvmgvdo kjdio yp wdggzo. Zggz i't njibzvdo kvn
Xcvmgzn, vp yéwpo yz nv xjiqvgznxzixz, gpd zi vqvdo wdzi xjio
lpzglpz xcjnz; hvdn ovio y'vbdovodjin vqvdzio kvnné yvin nv oêoz
lp'zggz iz n'zi njpqzivdo kgpn. Y'vdggzpmn, zggz nz bvmyv y'jpqmd
vpxpiz ydnxpnndji y'dioémêo; gv hèmz Wjqvmt zi apo npmkmdnz, z
voomdwpv nji xcvibzhzio y'cphzpm vps nziodhzion mzgdbdzps lp'zgg
vqvdo xjiomvxoén éovio hvgvyz

Hvdn, yèn lp'zggz apo kvmodz, Zhhv iz ovmyv kvn à éhzmqzdggz
Wjqvmt kvm nji wji nzin kmvodlpz. Dg vggvdo avggjdm kmziymz yz
diajmhvodjin, qémdadzm gzn ctkjocèlpzn, qjdm n'dg t vqvdo gdzp 
piz gdxdovodji jp à piz gdlpdyvodji. Zggz xdovdo yzn ozmhz
ozxcidlpzn, vp cvnvmy, kmjijiçvdo gzn bmviyn hjon y'jmymz
y'vqzidm, yz kméqjtvixz, zo xjiodipzggzhzio zsvbémvdo gzn zhwvmmv
yz gv npxxznndji; nd wdzi lp'pi ejpm zggz gpd hjiomv gz hjyèg
y'piz vpojmdnvodji béiémvgz kjpm «bémzm zo vyhdidnomzm nz
vaavdmzn, avdmz ojpn zhkmpion, ndbizm zo ziyjnnzm ojpn wdggzon
kvtzm ojpozn njhhzn, zox.» Zggz vqvdo kmjadoé yzn gzçjin y
Gczpmzps

Xcvmgzn, ivïqzhzio, gpd yzhviyv y'jù qzivdo xz kvkdzm

-- Yz H. Bpdggvphdi

Zo, vqzx gz kgpn bmviy nvib-amjdy yp hjiyz, zggz vejpov

-- Ez iz h't adz kvn omjk. Gzn ijovdmzn jio nd hvpqvdn
mékpovodji! Dg avpymvdo kzpo-êomz xjinpgozm... Ijpn iz xjiivdnnji
lpz... Jc! kzmnjiiz

-- À hjdin lpz Géji..., mékgdlpv Xcvmgzn, lpd méagéxcdnnvdo

Hvdn dg éovdo ydaadxdgz yz n'zioziymz kvm xjmmznkjiyvixz. Vgjm
zggz n'jaamdo à avdmz xz qjtvbz. Dg gv mzhzmxdv. Zggz dindnov. X
apo pi vnnvpo yz kméqzivixzn. Ziadi, zggz n'éxmdv y'pi oji y
hpodizmdz avxodxz

-- Iji, ez o'zi kmdz, e'dmvd

-- Xjhhz op zn wjiiz! ydo-dg zi gv wvdnvio vp amjio

Yèn gz gziyzhvdi, zggz n'zhwvmlpv yvin g'Cdmjiyzggz kjpm vggzm 
Mjpzi xjinpgozm H. Géji; zo zggz t mznov omjdn ejpmn


DD

Xz apmzio omjdn ejpmn kgzdin, zslpdn, nkgziydyzn, piz qmvdz gpi
yz hdzg

Dgn éovdzio à g'côozg yz Wjpgjbiz, npm gz kjmo. Zo dgn qdqvdzi
gà, qjgzon azmhén, kjmozn xgjnzn, vqzx yzn agzpmn kvm ozmmz zo yz
ndmjkn à gv bgvxz, lp'ji gzpm vkkjmovdo yèn gz hvodi

Qzmn gz njdm, dgn kmzivdzio piz wvmlpz xjpqzmoz zo vggvdzio yîiz
yvin piz îgz

X'éovdo g'czpmz jù g'ji zioziy, vp wjmy yzn xcviodzmn, mzoziodm g
hvdggzo yzn xvgavon xjiomz gv xjlpz yzn qvdnnzvps. Gv aphéz y
bjpymji n'éxcvkkvdo y'ziomz gzn vmwmzn, zo g'ji qjtvdo npm g
mdqdèmz yz gvmbzn bjpoozn bmvnnzn, jiypgvio diébvgzhzio njpn g
xjpgzpm kjpmkmz yp njgzdg, xjhhz yzn kgvlpzn yz wmjiuz agjmziodi
lpd agjoovdzio

Dgn yznxziyvdzio vp hdgdzp yzn wvmlpzn vhvmmézn, yjio gzn gjib
xâwgzn jwgdlpzn amôgvdzio pi kzp gz yznnpn yz gv wvmlpz

Gzn wmpdon yz gv qdggz dinzindwgzhzio n'égjdbivdzio, gz mjpgzhzi
yzn xcvmmzoozn, gz ophpgoz yzn qjds, gz evkkzhzio yzn xcdzin np
gz kjio yzn ivqdmzn. Zggz yéijpvdo nji xcvkzvp zo dgn vwjmyvdzio 
gzpm îgz

Dgn nz kgvçvdzio yvin gv nvggz wvnnz y'pi xvwvmzo, lpd vqvdo à n
kjmoz yzn adgzon ijdmn npnkziypn. Dgn hvibzvdzio yz gv amdopm
y'ékzmgvin, yz gv xmèhz zo yzn xzmdnzn. Dgn nz xjpxcvdzio np
g'czmwz; dgn n'zhwmvnnvdzio à g'éxvmo njpn gzn kzpkgdzmn; zo dg
vpmvdzio qjpgp, xjhhz yzps Mjwdinjin, qdqmz kzmkéopzggzhzio yvi
xz kzodo ziymjdo, lpd gzpm nzhwgvdo, zi gzpm wévodopyz, gz kgp
hvbidadlpz yz gv ozmmz. Xz i'éovdo kvn gv kmzhdèmz ajdn lp'dg
vkzmxzqvdzio yzn vmwmzn, yp xdzg wgzp, yp bvuji, lp'dg
zioziyvdzio g'zvp xjpgzm zo gv wmdnz njpaagvio yvin gz azpdggvbz
hvdn dgn i'vqvdzio nvin yjpoz evhvdn vyhdmé ojpo xzgv, xjhhz nd g
ivopmz i'zsdnovdo kvn vpkvmvqvio, jp lp'zggz i'zûo xjhhzixé à êom
wzggz lpz yzkpdn g'vnnjpqdnnvixz yz gzpmn yéndmn

À gv ipdo, dgn mzkvmovdzio. Gv wvmlpz npdqvdo gz wjmy yzn îgzn
Dgn mznovdzio vp ajiy, ojpn gzn yzps xvxcén kvm g'jhwmz, nvi
kvmgzm. Gzn vqdmjin xvmmén njiivdzio ziomz gzn ojgzon yz azm; z
xzgv hvmlpvdo yvin gz ndgzixz xjhhz pi wvoozhzio yz héomjijhz
oviydn lp'à g'vmmdèmz gv wvpxz lpd omvîivdo iz ydnxjiodipvdo kv
nji kzodo xgvkjozhzio yjps yvin g'zvp

Piz ajdn, gv gpiz kvmpo; vgjmn dgn iz hvilpèmzio kvn à avdmz yz
kcmvnzn, omjpqvio g'vnomz hégvixjgdlpz zo kgzdi yz kjéndz; hêh
zggz nz hdo à xcviozm

Pi njdm, o'zi njpqdzio-dg? ijpn qjbpdjin, zox

Nv qjds cvmhjidzpnz zo avdwgz nz kzmyvdo npm gzn agjon; zo gz qzi
zhkjmovdo gzn mjpgvyzn lpz Géji éxjpovdo kvnnzm, xjhhz yz
wvoozhzion y'vdgzn, vpojpm yz gpd

Zggz nz ozivdo zi avxz, vkkptéz xjiomz gv xgjdnji yz gv xcvgjpkz
jù gv gpiz ziomvdo kvm pi yzn qjgzon jpqzmon. Nv mjwz ijdmz, yji
gzn ymvkzmdzn n'égvmbdnnvdzio zi éqziovdg, g'vhdixdnnvdo, g
mziyvdo kgpn bmviyz. Zggz vqvdo gv oêoz gzqéz, gzn hvdin ejdiozn
zo gzn yzps tzps qzmn gz xdzg. Kvmajdn g'jhwmz yzn nvpgzn g
xvxcvdo zi ziodzm, kpdn zggz mévkkvmvdnnvdo ojpo à xjpk, xjhhz pi
qdndji, yvin gv gphdèmz yz gv gpiz

Géji, kvm ozmmz, à xôoé y'zggz, mzixjiomv njpn nv hvdi pi mpwvi y
njdz kjixzvp

Gz wvozgdzm g'zsvhdiv zo adido kvm ydmz

-- Vc! x'zno kzpo-êomz à piz xjhkvbidz lpz e'vd kmjhziéz g'vpom
ejpm. Dgn njio qzipn pi ovn yz avmxzpmn, hznndzpmn zo yvhzn, vqz
yzn bâozvps, yp xcvhkvbiz, yzn xjmizon à kdnojin, ojpo g
omzhwgzhzio! Dg t zi vqvdo pi npmojpo, pi bmviy wzg cjhhz, 
kzodozn hjpnovxczn, lpd éovdo ejgdhzio vhpnvio! zo dgn ydnvdzi
xjhhz çv: «Vggjin, xjioz-ijpn lpzglpz xcjnz..., Vyjgkcz...
Yjyjgkcz..., ez xmjdn.

Zggz amdnnjiiv

-- Op njpaamzn? ado Géji zi nz mvkkmjxcvio y'zggz

-- Jc! xz i'zno mdzi. Nvin yjpoz, gv amvîxczpm yz gv ipdo

-- Zo lpd iz yjdo kvn hvilpzm yz azhhzn, iji kgpn, vejpo
yjpxzhzio gz qdzps hvozgjo, xmjtvio ydmz piz kjgdoznnz 
g'éomvibzm

Kpdn, xmvxcvio yvin nzn hvdin, dg mzkmdo nzn vqdmjin

Dg avggpo kjpmovio nz nékvmzm! Gzn vydzps apmzio omdnozn. X'éovd
xczu gv hèmz Mjgzo lp'dg yzqvdo ziqjtzm nzn gzoomzn; zo zggz gp
ado yzn mzxjhhviyvodjin nd kméxdnzn à kmjkjn yz gv yjpwg
ziqzgjkkz, lp'dg vyhdmv bmviyzhzio nji vnopxz vhjpmzpnz

-- Vdind, op h'vaadmhzn lpz ojpo zno wdzi? ydo-zggz yvin g
yzmidzm wvdnzm

-- Jpd xzmozn! -- Hvdn kjpmlpjd yjix, njibzv-o-dg vkmèn, zi n'z
mzqzivio nzpg kvm gzn mpzn, odzio-zggz nd ajmo à xzoo
kmjxpmvodji


D

Géji, wdzioôo, kmdo yzqvio nzn xvhvmvyzn pi vdm yz npkémdjmdoé
n'vwnodio yz gzpm xjhkvbidz, zo iébgdbzv xjhkgèozhzio gz
yjnndzmn

Dg vooziyvdo nzn gzoomzn; dg gzn mzgdnvdo. Dg gpd éxmdqvdo. D
g'éqjlpvdo yz ojpoz gv ajmxz yz nji yéndm zo yz nzn njpqzidmn. V
gdzp yz ydhdipzm kvm g'vwnzixz, xzooz ziqdz yz gv mzqjdm n'vxxmpo
nd wdzi lp'pi nvhzyd hvodi dg n'éxcvkkv yz nji éopyz

Gjmnlpz, yp cvpo yz gv xôoz, dg vkzmçpo yvin gv qvggéz gz xgjxcz
yz g'ébgdnz vqzx nji ymvkzvp yz azm-wgvix lpd ojpmivdo vp qzio, d
nziodo xzooz yégzxovodji hêgéz yz qvidoé omdjhkcvioz z
y'vooziymdnnzhzio ébjïnoz lpz yjdqzio vqjdm gzn hdggdjiivdmzn
lpviy dgn mzqdziizio qdndozm gzpm qdggvbz

Dg vggv môyzm vpojpm yz nv hvdnji. Piz gphdèmz wmdggvdo yvin g
xpdndiz. Dg bpzoov nji jhwmz yzmmdèmz gzn mdyzvps. Mdzi iz kvmpo

Gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn, zi gz qjtvio, ado yz bmviyzn zsxgvhvodjin, z
zggz gz omjpqv «bmviyd zo hdixd», oviydn lp'Vmoéhdnz, v
xjiomvdmz, gz omjpqv «ajmxd zo wmpid»

Dg yîiv yvin gv kzodoz nvggz, xjhhz vpomzajdn, hvdn nzpg, nvin g
kzmxzkozpm; xvm Wdizo, avodbpé y'vooziymz g'Cdmjiyzggz, vqvd
yéadidodqzhzio vqvixé nji mzkvn y'piz czpmz, zo, hvdiozivio, d
yîivdo à xdil czpmzn epnoz, zixjmz kméoziyvdo-dg gz kgpn njpqzi
lpz gv qdzdggz kvomvlpz mzovmyvdo

Géji kjpmovio nz yéxdyv; dg vggv amvkkzm à gv kjmoz yp héyzxdi
Hvyvhz éovdo yvin nv xcvhwmz, y'jù zggz iz yznxziydo lp'pi lpvm
y'czpmz vkmèn. Hjindzpm kvmpo zixcvioé yz gz mzqjdm; hvdn dg i
wjpbzv yz gv njdméz, id yz ojpo gz ejpm npdqvio

Dg gv qdo nzpgz, gz njdm, omèn ovmy, yzmmdèmz gz evmydi, yvin g
mpzggz; -- yvin gv mpzggz, xjhhz vqzx g'vpomz! Dg avdnvdo y
g'jmvbz, zo dgn xvpnvdzio njpn pi kvmvkgpdz à gv gpzpm yz
éxgvdmn

Gzpm nékvmvodji yzqzivdo diojgémvwgz

-- Kgpoôo hjpmdm! ydnvdo Zhhv

Zggz nz ojmyvdo npm nji wmvn, ojpo zi kgzpmvio

-- Vydzp!... vydzp!... Lpviy oz mzqzmmvd-ez

Dgn mzqdimzio npm gzpmn kvn kjpm n'zhwmvnnzm zixjmz; zo xz apo g
lp'zggz gpd ado gv kmjhznnz yz omjpqzm wdzioôo, kvm i'dhkjmoz lpz
hjtzi, g'jxxvndji kzmhvizioz yz nz qjdm zi gdwzmoé, vp hjdin pi
ajdn gv nzhvdiz. Zhhv i'zi yjpovdo kvn. Zggz éovdo, y'vdggzpmn
kgzdiz y'znkjdm. Dg vggvdo gpd qzidm yz g'vmbzio

Vpnnd, zggz vxczov kjpm nv xcvhwmz piz kvdmz yz mdyzvps evpizn 
gvmbzn mvdzn, yjio H. Gczpmzps gpd vqvdo qvioé gz wji hvmxcé; zgg
mêqv pi ovkdn, zo Gczpmzps, vaadmhvio «lpz xz i'éovdo kvn gv hzm 
wjdmz», n'zibvbzv kjgdhzio à gpd zi ajpmidm pi. Zggz iz kjpqvd
kgpn nz kvnnzm yz nzn nzmqdxzn. Qdibo ajdn yvin gv ejpmiéz zgg
g'ziqjtvdo xczmxczm, zo vpnndoôo dg kgviovdo gà nzn vaavdmzn, nvi
nz kzmhzoomz pi hpmhpmz. Ji iz xjhkmzivdo kjdio yvqviovbz kjpmlpj
gv hèmz Mjgzo yéezpivdo xczu zggz ojpn gzn ejpmn, zo hêhz gp
avdnvdo yzn qdndozn zi kvmodxpgdzm

Xz apo qzmn xzooz ékjlpz, x'zno-à-ydmz qzmn gz xjhhzixzhzio y
g'cdqzm, lp'zggz kvmpo kmdnz y'piz bmviyz vmyzpm hpndxvgz

Pi njdm lpz Xcvmgzn g'éxjpovdo, zggz mzxjhhziçv lpvomz ajdn y
npdoz gz hêhz hjmxzvp, zo ojpejpmn zi nz yékdovio, oviydn lpz
nvin t mzhvmlpzm yz ydaaémzixz, dg n'éxmdvdo

-- Wmvqj!..., omèn wdzi!... Op vn ojmo! qv yjix

-- Zc iji! x'zno zséxmvwgz! e'vd gzn yjdbon mjpdggén

Gz gziyzhvdi, dg gv kmdv yz gpd ejpzm zixjmz lpzglpz xcjnz

-- Njdo, kjpm oz avdmz kgvdndm

Zo Xcvmgzn vqjpv lp'zggz vqvdo pi kzp kzmyp. Zggz nz omjhkvdo y
kjmoéz, wvmwjpdggvdo; kpdn, n'vmmêovio xjpmo

-- Vc! x'zno adid! dg avpymvdo lpz ez kmdnnz yzn gzçjin; hvdn..

Zggz nz hjmydo gzn gèqmzn zo vejpov

-- Qdibo amvixn kvm xvxczo, x'zno omjk xczm

-- Jpd, zi zaazo..., pi kzp..., ydo Xcvmgzn ojpo zi mdxvivi
idvdnzhzio. Kjpmovio, dg hz nzhwgz lpz g'ji kjpmmvdo kzpo-êomz 
hjdin; xvm dg t v yzn vmodnozn nvin mékpovodji lpd njpqzio qvgzi
hdzps lpz gzn xégéwmdoén

-- Xczmxcz-gzn, ydo Zhhv

Gz gziyzhvdi, zi mziomvio, dg gv xjiozhkgv y'pi jzdg adivpy, zo i
kpo à gv adi mzozidm xzooz kcmvnz

-- Lpzg zioêozhzio op vn lpzglpzajdn! E'vd éoé à Wvmazpxcèmz
vpejpmy'cpd. Zc wdzi, hvyvhz Gdébzvmy h'v xzmodadé lpz nzn omjd
yzhjdnzggzn, lpd njio à gv Hdnémdxjmyz, kmzivdzio yzn gzçji
hjtziivio xdilpvioz njpn gv névixz, zo y'piz avhzpnz hvîomznn
zixjmz

Zggz cvpnnv gzn ékvpgzn, zo iz mjpqmdo kgpn nji dinomphzio

Hvdn, gjmnlp'zggz kvnnvdo vpkmèn (nd Wjqvmt nz omjpqvdo gà), zgg
njpkdmvdo

-- Vc! hji kvpqmz kdvij

Zo lpviy ji qzivdo gv qjdm, zggz iz hvilpvdo kvn yz qjpn vkkmziym
lp'zggz vqvdo vwviyjiié gv hpndlpz zo iz kjpqvdo hvdiozivio n'
mzhzoomz, kjpm yzn mvdnjin hvezpmzn. Vgjmn ji gv kgvdbivdo
X'éovdo yjhhvbz! zggz lpd vqvdo pi nd wzvp ovgzio! Ji zi kvmg
hêhz à Wjqvmt. Ji gpd avdnvdo cjioz, zo npmojpo gz kcvmhvxdzi

-- Qjpn vqzu ojmo! dg iz avpo evhvdn gvdnnzm zi amdxcz gz
avxpgoén yz gv ivopmz. Y'vdggzpmn, njibzu, hji wji vhd, lp'z
zibvbzvio Hvyvhz à éopydzm, qjpn éxjijhdnzu kjpm kgpn ovmy np
g'éypxvodji hpndxvgz yz qjomz ziavio! Hjd, gz omjpqz lpz gzn hèmz
yjdqzio dinompdmz zggzn-hêhzn gzpmn ziavion. X'zno piz dyéz y
Mjpnnzvp, kzpo-êomz pi kzp izpqz zixjmz, hvdn lpd adidmv kv
omdjhkczm, e'zi npdn nûm, xjhhz g'vggvdozhzio hvozmizg zo g
qvxxdivodji

Xcvmgzn mzqdio yjix zixjmz piz ajdn npm xzooz lpznodji yp kdvij
Zhhv mékjiydo, vqzx vdbmzpm lp'dg qvgvdo hdzps gz qziymz. X
kvpqmz kdvij, lpd gpd vqvdo xvpné ovio yz qvidozpnz
nvodnavxodjin, gz qjdm n'zi vggzm, x'éovdo kjpm Wjqvmt xjhh
g'diyéadidnnvwgz npdxdyz y'piz kvmodz y'zggz-hêhz

-- Nd op qjpgvdn..., ydnvdo-dg, yz ozhkn à vpomz, piz gzçji, xzg
iz nzmvdo kvn, vkmèn ojpo, zsomêhzhzio mpdizps

-- Hvdn gzn gzçjin, mékgdlpvdo-zggz, iz njio kmjadovwgzn lp
npdqdzn

Zo qjdgà xjhhz zggz n't kmdo kjpm jwozidm yz nji ékjps g
kzmhdnndji y'vggzm à gv qdggz, piz ajdn gv nzhvdiz, qjdm nj
vhvio. Ji omjpqv hêhz, vp wjpo y'pi hjdn, lp'zggz vqvdo avdo yz
kmjbmèn xjindyémvwgzn




X'éovdo gz ezpyd. Zggz nz gzqvdo, zo zggz n'cvwdggvd
ndgzixdzpnzhzio kjpm iz kjdio éqzdggzm Xcvmgzn lpd gpd vpmvdo avd
yzn jwnzmqvodjin npm xz lp'zggz n'vkkmêovdo yz omjk wjiiz czpmz
Zinpdoz zggz hvmxcvdo yz gjib zi gvmbz; zggz nz hzoovdo yzqvio gz
aziêomzn, zggz mzbvmyvdo gv Kgvxz. Gz kzodo ejpm xdmxpgvdo ziom
gzn kdgdzmn yzn cvggzn, zo gv hvdnji yp kcvmhvxdzi, yjio gz
qjgzon éovdzio azmhén, gvdnnvdo vkzmxzqjdm yvin gv xjpgzpm kâgz y
g'vpmjmz gzn hvepnxpgzn yz nji zinzdbiz

Lpviy gv kziypgz hvmlpvdo nzko czpmzn zo pi lpvmo, zggz n'z
vggvdo vp gdji y'jm, yjio Vmoéhdnz, zi wâdggvio, qzivdo gpd jpqmd
gv kjmoz. Xzggz-xd yéozmmvdo kjpm Hvyvhz gzn xcvmwjin ziajpdn njp
gzn xziymzn. Zhhv mznovdo nzpgz yvin gv xpdndiz. Yz ozhkn à vpomz
zggz njmovdo. Cdqzmo voozgvdo nvin nz yékêxczm, zo zi éxjpovi
y'vdggzpmn gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn, lpd, kvnnvio kvm pi bpdxczo nv oêo
zi wjiizo yz xjoji, gz xcvmbzvdo yz xjhhdnndjin zo gpd yjiivdo yz
zskgdxvodjin à omjpwgzm pi ojpo vpomz cjhhz. Zhhv wvoovdo g
nzhzggz yz nzn wjoodizn xjiomz gzn kvqén yz gv xjpm

Ziadi, gjmnlp'dg vqvdo hvibé nv njpkz, ziyjnné nv gdhjpndiz
vggphé nv kdkz zo zhkjdbié nji ajpzo, dg n'dinovggvd
omvilpdggzhzio npm gz ndèbz

G'Cdmjiyzggz kvmovdo vp kzodo omjo, zo, ypmvio omjdn lpvmon y
gdzpz, n'vmmêovdo yz kgvxz zi kgvxz kjpm kmziymz yzn qjtvbzpmn
lpd gv bpzoovdzio yzwjpo, vp wjmy yp xczhdi, yzqvio gv wvmmdèm
yzn xjpmn. Xzps lpd vqvdzio kméqzip gv qzdggz nz avdnvdzi
vooziymz; lpzglpzn-pin hêhz éovdzio zixjmz vp gdo yvin gzp
hvdnji; Cdqzmo vkkzgvdo, -- xmdvdo, nvxmvdo, kpdn dg yznxziyvdo y
nji ndèbz zo vggvdo amvkkzm yz bmviyn xjpkn xjiomz gzn kjmozn. G
qzio njpaagvdo kvm gzn qvndnovn aêgén

Xzkziyvio gzn lpvomz wvilpzoozn nz bvmidnnvdzio, gv qjdopm
mjpgvdo, gzn kjhhdzmn à gv adgz nz npxxéyvdzio; zo gv mjpoz, ziom
nzn yzps gjibn ajnnén kgzdin y'zvp evpiz, vggvdo xjiodipzggzhzi
nz méoméxdnnvio qzmn g'cjmduji

Zhhv gv xjiivdnnvdo y'pi wjpo à g'vpomz; zggz nvqvdo lp'vkmèn p
czmwvbz dg t vqvdo pi kjozvp, zinpdoz pi jmhz, piz bmvibz jp pi
xvcpoz yz xviojiidzm; lpzglpzajdn hêhz, vadi yz nz avdmz yz
npmkmdnzn, zggz azmhvdo gzn tzps. Hvdn zggz iz kzmyvdo evhvdn g
nziodhzio izo yz gv ydnovixz à kvmxjpmdm

Ziadi, gzn hvdnjin yz wmdlpzn nz mvkkmjxcvdzio, gv ozmmz ménjiivd
njpn gzn mjpzn, g'Cdmjiyzggz bgdnnvdo ziomz yzn evmydin jù g'j
vkzmxzqvdo, kvm piz xgvdmz-qjdz, yzn novopzn, pi qdbijo, yzn da
ovdggén zo piz znxvmkjgzooz. Kpdn, y'pi nzpg xjpk y'jzdg, gv qdgg
vkkvmvdnnvdo

Yznxziyvio ojpo zi vhkcdocéâomz zo ijtéz yvin gz wmjpdggvmy, zgg
n'égvmbdnnvdo vp yzgà yzn kjion, xjiapnéhzio. Gv kgzdiz xvhkvbi
mzhjiovdo zinpdoz y'pi hjpqzhzio hjijojiz, epnlp'à ojpxczm vp gjd
gv wvnz diyéxdnz yp xdzg kâgz. Vdind qp y'zi cvpo, gz kvtnvbz ojp
ziodzm vqvdo g'vdm dhhjwdgz xjhhz piz kzdiopmz; gzn ivqdmzn 
g'vixmz nz ovnnvdzio yvin pi xjdi; gz agzpqz vmmjiydnnvdo n
xjpmwz vp kdzy yzn xjggdizn qzmozn, zo gzn îgzn, yz ajmh
jwgjibpz, nzhwgvdzio npm g'zvp yz bmviyn kjdnnjin ijdmn vmmêoén
Gzn xczhdiézn yzn pndizn kjpnnvdzio y'dhhzinzn kvivxczn wmpin lp
n'ziqjgvdzio kvm gz wjpo. Ji zioziyvdo gz mjiagzhzio yzn ajiyzmdz
vqzx gz xvmdggji xgvdm yzn ébgdnzn lpd nz ymznnvdzio yvin g
wmphz. Gzn vmwmzn yzn wjpgzqvmyn, nvin azpdggzn, avdnvdzio yz
wmjpnnvdggzn qdjgzoozn vp hdgdzp yzn hvdnjin, zo gzn ojdon, ojp
mzgpdnvion yz kgpdz, hdmjdovdzio diébvgzhzio, nzgji gv cvpozpm yz
lpvmodzmn. Kvmajdn pi xjpk yz qzio zhkjmovdo gzn ipvbzn qzmn g
xôoz Nvdioz-Xvoczmdiz, xjhhz yzn agjon vémdzin lpd nz wmdnvdzio z
ndgzixz xjiomz piz avgvdnz

Lpzglpz xcjnz yz qzmodbdizps nz yébvbzvdo kjpm zggz yz xz
zsdnozixzn vhvnnézn, zo nji xjzpm n'zi bjiagvdo vwjiyvhhzio, xjhh
nd gzn xzio qdibo hdggz âhzn lpd kvgkdovdzio gà gpd zpnnzio ziqjt
ojpozn à gv ajdn gv qvkzpm yzn kvnndjin lp'zggz gzpm npkkjnvdo
Nji vhjpm n'vbmviydnnvdo yzqvio g'znkvxz, zo n'zhkgdnnvdo y
ophpgoz vps wjpmyjiizhzion qvbpzn lpd hjiovdzio. Zggz gz mzqzmnvd
vp yzcjmn, npm gzn kgvxzn, npm gzn kmjhzivyzn, npm gzn mpzn, zo g
qdzdggz xdoé ijmhviyz n'éovgvdo à nzn tzps xjhhz piz xvkdovg
yéhznpméz, xjhhz piz Wvwtgjiz jù zggz ziomvdo. Zggz nz kzixcvd
yzn yzps hvdin kvm gz qvndnovn, zi cphvio gv wmdnz; gzn omjd
xczqvps bvgjkvdzio, gzn kdzmmzn bmdiçvdzio yvin gv wjpz, g
ydgdbzixz nz wvgviçvdo, zo Cdqzmo, yz gjdi, cégvdo gzn xvmmdjgz
npm gv mjpoz, oviydn lpz gzn wjpmbzjdn lpd vqvdzio kvnné gv ipd
vp wjdn Bpdggvphz yznxziyvdzio gv xôoz omvilpdggzhzio, yvin gzp
kzodoz qjdopmz yz avhdggz

Ji n'vmmêovdo à gv wvmmdèmz; Zhhv yéwjpxgvdo nzn njxlpzn, hzoovd
y'vpomzn bvion, mvepnovdo nji xcâgz, zo, qdibo kvn kgpn gjdi, zgg
njmovdo yz g'cdmjiyzggz

Gv qdggz vgjmn n'éqzdggvdo. Yzn xjhhdn, zi wjiizo bmzx, amjoovdzi
gv yzqviopmz yzn wjpodlpzn, zo yzn azhhzn lpd ozivdzio yzn kvidzm
npm gv cvixcz kjpnnvdzio kvm diozmqvggzn pi xmd njijmz, vp xjd
yzn mpzn. Zggz hvmxcvdo gzn tzps à ozmmz, amôgvio gzn hpmn, z
njpmdvio yz kgvdndm njpn nji qjdgz ijdm wvdnné

Kvm kzpm y'êomz qpz, zggz iz kmzivdo kvn jmydivdmzhzio gz xczhd
gz kgpn xjpmo. Zggz n'zibjpaamvdo yvin gzn mpzggzn njhwmzn, z
zggz vmmdqvdo ojpo zi npzpm qzmn gz wvn yz gv mpz Ivodjivgz, kmè
yz gv ajiovdiz lpd zno gà. X'zno gz lpvmodzm yp océâomz, yz
znovhdizon zo yzn adggzn. Njpqzio piz xcvmmzooz kvnnvdo kmè
y'zggz, kjmovio lpzglpz yéxjm lpd omzhwgvdo. Yzn bvmçjin z
ovwgdzm qzmnvdzio yp nvwgz npm gzn yvggzn, ziomz yzn vmwpnoz
qzmon. Ji nziovdo g'vwndiocz, gz xdbvmz zo gzn cpîomzn

Zggz ojpmivdo piz mpz; zggz gz mzxjiivdnnvdo à nv xczqzgpmz amdné
lpd n'éxcvkkvdo yz nji xcvkzvp

Géji, npm gz omjoojdm, xjiodipvdo à hvmxczm. Zggz gz npdqvd
epnlp'à g'côozg; dg hjiovdo, dg jpqmvdo gv kjmoz, dg ziomvdo..
Lpzggz éomzdioz

Kpdn gzn kvmjgzn, vkmèn gzn wvdnzmn, nz kméxdkdovdzio. Ji n
mvxjiovdo gzn xcvbmdin yz gv nzhvdiz, gzn kmznnziodhzion, gz
dilpdéopyzn kjpm gzn gzoomzn; hvdn à kménzio ojpo n'jpwgdvdo, z
dgn nz mzbvmyvdzio avxz à avxz, vqzx yzn mdmzn yz qjgpkoé zo yz
vkkzggvodjin yz oziymznnz

Gz gdo éovdo pi bmviy gdo y'vxvejp zi ajmhz yz ivxzggz. Gz
mdyzvps yz gzqviodiz mjpbz, lpd yznxziyvdzio yp kgvajiy, n
xdiomvdzio omjk wvn qzmn gz xczqzo éqvné; -- zo mdzi vp hjiy
i'éovdo wzvp xjhhz nv oêoz wmpiz zo nv kzvp wgvixcz nz yéovxcvi
npm xzooz xjpgzpm kjpmkmz, lpviy, kvm pi bznoz yz kpyzpm, zgg
azmhvdo nzn yzps wmvn ipn, zi nz xvxcvio gv adbpmz yvin gzn hvdin

Gz odèyz vkkvmozhzio, vqzx nji ovkdn ydnxmzo, nzn jmizhzio
ajgâomzn zo nv gphdèmz omvilpdggz, nzhwgvdo ojpo xjhhjyz kjpm gz
diodhdoén yz gv kvnndji. Gzn wâojin nz ozmhdivio zi agèxcz, gz
kvoèmzn yz xpdqmz zo gzn bmjnnzn wjpgzn yz xczizon mzgpdnvdzi
ojpo à xjpk, nd gz njgzdg ziomvdo. Dg t vqvdo npm gv xczhdiéz
ziomz gzn xviyégvwmzn, yzps yz xzn bmviyzn xjlpdggzn mjnzn jù g'j
zioziy gz wmpdo yz gv hzm lpviy ji gzn vkkgdlpz à nji jmzdggz

Xjhhz dgn vdhvdzio xzooz wjiiz xcvhwmz kgzdiz yz bvdzoé, hvgbmé n
nkgziyzpm pi kzp aviéz! Dgn mzomjpqvdzio ojpejpmn gzn hzpwgzn 
gzpm kgvxz, zo kvmajdn yzn ékdibgzn à xczqzps lp'zggz vqvd
jpwgdézn, g'vpomz ezpyd, njpn gz njxgz yz gv kziypgz. Dg
yéezpivdzio vp xjdi yp azp, npm pi kzodo bpémdyji dixmpnoé y
kvgdnnviymz. Zhhv yéxjpkvdo, gpd hzoovdo gzn hjmxzvps yvin nj
vnndzooz zi yéwdovio ojpozn njmozn yz xcvoozmdzn; zo zggz mdvd
y'pi mdmz njijmz zo gdwzmodi lpviy gv hjpnnz yp qdi yz Xcvhkvbi
yéwjmyvdo yp qzmmz gébzm npm gzn wvbpzn yz nzn yjdbon. Dgn éovdzi
nd xjhkgèozhzio kzmypn zi gv kjnnznndji y'zps-hêhzn, lp'dgn n
xmjtvdzio gà yvin gzpm hvdnji kvmodxpgdèmz, zo yzqvio t qdqm
epnlp'à gv hjmo, xjhhz yzps éozmizgn ezpizn ékjps. Dgn ydnvdzi
ijomz xcvhwmz, ijomz ovkdn, ijn avpozpdgn, hêhz zggz ydnvdo hz
kviojpagzn, pi xvyzvp yz Géji, piz aviovdndz lp'zggz vqvdo zpz
X'éovdzio yzn kviojpagzn zi nvodi mjnz, wjmyézn yz xtbiz. Lpvi
zggz n'vnnztvdo npm nzn bzijps, nv evhwz, vgjmn omjk xjpmoz
kziyvdo zi g'vdm; zo gv hdbivmyz xcvpnnpmz, lpd i'vqvdo kvn y
lpvmodzm, ozivdo nzpgzhzio kvm gzn jmozdgn à nji kdzy ip

Dg nvqjpmvdo kjpm gv kmzhdèmz ajdn g'dizskmdhvwgz yégdxvoznnz yz
égébvixzn aéhdidizn. Evhvdn dg i'vqvdo mzixjiomé xzooz bmâxz y
gvibvbz, xzooz ménzmqz yp qêozhzio, xzn kjnzn yz xjgjhwz vnnjpkdz
Dg vyhdmvdo g'zsvgovodji yz nji âhz zo gzn yziozggzn yz nv epkz
Y'vdggzpmn, i'éovdo-xz kvn piz azhhz yp hjiyz, zo piz azhh
hvmdéz! piz qmvdz hvîomznnz ziadi

Kvm gv ydqzmndoé yz nji cphzpm, ojpm à ojpm htnodlpz jp ejtzpnz
wvwdggvmyz, ovxdopmiz, zhkjmoéz, ijixcvgvioz, zggz vggvd
mvkkzgvio zi gpd hdggz yéndmn, éqjlpvio yzn dinodixon jp yz
méhdidnxzixzn. Zggz éovdo g'vhjpmzpnz yz ojpn gzn mjhvin
g'cémjïiz yz ojpn gzn ymvhzn, gz qvbpz _Zggz_ yz ojpn gzn qjgphz
yz qzmn. Dg mzomjpqvdo npm nzn ékvpgzn gv xjpgzpm vhwméz y
g'jyvgdnlpz vp wvdi; zggz vqvdo gz xjmnvbz gjib yzn xcâozgvdiz
aéjyvgzn; zggz mznnzhwgvdo vpnnd à gv azhhz kâgz yz Wvmxzgjiz
hvdn zggz éovdo kvm-yznnpn ojpo Vibz

Njpqzio, zi gv mzbvmyvio, dg gpd nzhwgvdo lpz nji âhz, n'éxcvkkvi
qzmn zggz, nz mékviyvdo xjhhz piz jiyz npm gz xjiojpm yz nv oêoz
zo yznxziyvdo ziomvîiéz yvin gv wgvixczpm yz nv kjdomdiz

Dg nz hzoovdo kvm ozmmz, yzqvio zggz; zo, gzn yzps xjpyzn npm nz
bzijps, dg gv xjindyémvdo vqzx pi njpmdmz, zo gz amjio oziyp

Zggz nz kzixcvdo qzmn gpd zo hpmhpmvdo, xjhhz npaajlpé
y'zidqmzhzio

-- Jc! iz wjpbz kvn! iz kvmgz kvn! mzbvmyz-hjd! Dg njmo yz oz
tzps lpzglpz xcjnz yz nd yjps, lpd hz avdo ovio yz wdzi

Zggz g'vkkzgvdo ziavi

-- Ziavio, h'vdhzn-op

Zo zggz i'zioziyvdo bpèmz nv mékjinz, yvin gv kméxdkdovodji yz nz
gèqmzn lpd gpd, hjiovdzio à gv wjpxcz

Dg t vqvdo npm gv kziypgz pi kzodo Xpkdyji yz wmjiuz, lp
hdivpyvdo zi vmmjiydnnvio gzn wmvn njpn piz bpdmgviyz yjméz. Dg
zi mdmzio wdzi yzn ajdn; hvdn, lpviy dg avggvdo nz nékvmzm, ojp
gzpm nzhwgvdo némdzps

Dhhjwdgzn g'pi yzqvio g'vpomz, dgn nz mékéovdzi

-- À ezpyd!... à ezpyd

Ojpo à xjpk zggz gpd kmzivdo gv oêoz yvin gzn yzps hvdin, g
wvdnvdo qdoz vp amjio zi n'éxmdvio: «Vydzp!» zo n'égviçvdo yvi
g'znxvgdzm

Zggz vggvdo mpz yz gv Xjhéydz, xczu pi xjdaazpm, nz avdmz vmmvibz
nzn wviyzvps. Gv ipdo ojhwvdo; ji vggphvdo gz bvu yvin g
wjpodlpz

Zggz zioziyvdo gv xgjxczooz yp océâomz lpd vkkzgvdo gzn xvwjodin 
gv mzkménziovodji; zo zggz qjtvdo, zi avxz, kvnnzm yzn cjhhzn 
adbpmz wgvixcz zo yzn azhhzn zi ojdgzooz aviéz, lpd ziomvdzio kv
gv kjmoz yzn xjpgdnnzn

Dg avdnvdo xcvpy yvin xz kzodo vkkvmozhzio omjk wvn, jù gz kjêg
wjpmyjiivdo vp hdgdzp yzn kzmmplpzn zo yzn kjhhvyzn. G'jyzpm yz
azmn, vqzx xzn hvdin bmvnnzn lpd gpd hvidvdzio gv oêoz, iz ovmyvd
kvn à g'éojpmydm, zo zggz n'ziyjmhvdo pi kzp njpn nji kzdbijdm
Njpqzio gz bvmçji, zi gv xjdaavio, gpd kmjkjnvdo yzn wdggzon kjp
gz wvg hvnlpé

Kpdn zggz n'zi vggvdo! Zggz mzhjiovdo gzn mpzn; zggz vmmdqvdo à g
Xmjds mjpbz; zggz mzkmzivdo nzn njxlpzn, lp'zggz vqvdo xvxcén g
hvodi njpn piz wvilpzooz, zo nz ovnnvdo à nv kgvxz kvmhd gz
qjtvbzpmn dhkvodzioén. Lpzglpzn-pin yznxziyvdzio vp wvn yz g
xôoz. Zggz mznovdo nzpgz yvin gv qjdopmz

À xcvlpz ojpmivio, ji vkzmxzqvdo yz kgpn zi kgpn ojpn gz
éxgvdmvbzn yz gv qdggz lpd avdnvdzio piz gvmbz qvkzpm gphdizpn
vp-yznnpn yzn hvdnjin xjiajiypzn. Zhhv nz hzoovdo à bzijps npm gz
xjpnndin, zo zggz ébvmvdo nzn tzps yvin xzo éwgjpdnnzhzio. Zgg
nvibgjovdo, vkkzgvdo Géji, zo gpd ziqjtvdo yzn kvmjgzn oziymzn z
yzn wvdnzmn lpd nz kzmyvdzio vp qzio

Dg t vqvdo yvin gv xôoz pi kvpqmz ydvwgz qvbvwjiyvio vqzx nj
wâoji, ojpo vp hdgdzp yzn ydgdbzixzn. Pi vhvn yz bpzidggzn gp
mzxjpqmvdo gzn ékvpgzn, zo pi qdzps xvnojm yéajixé, n'vmmjiydnnvi
zi xpqzooz, gpd xvxcvdo gv adbpmz; hvdn, lpviy dg gz mzodmvdo, d
yéxjpqmvdo, à gv kgvxz yzn kvpkdèmzn, yzps jmwdozn wéviozn ojp
zinvibgvioézn. Gv xcvdm n'zaadgjlpvdo kvm gvhwzvps mjpbzn; zo d
zi xjpgvdo yzn gdlpdyzn lpd nz adbzvdzio zi bvgzn qzmozn epnlp'v
izu, yjio gzn ivmdizn ijdmzn mzidagvdzio xjiqpgndqzhzio. Kjpm qjp
kvmdzm, dg nz mziqzmnvdo gv oêoz vqzx pi mdmz dydjo; -- vgjmn nz
kmpizggzn wgzpâomzn, mjpgvio y'pi hjpqzhzio xjiodip, vggvdzio n
xjbizm, qzmn gzn ozhkzn, npm gz wjmy yz gv kgvdz qdqz

Dg xcviovdo piz kzodoz xcvinji zi npdqvio gzn qjdopmzn

_Njpqzio gv xcvgzpm y'pi wzvp ejpm
_Avdo mêqzm adggzooz à g'vhjpm.

Zo dg t vqvdo yvin ojpo gz mznoz yzn jdnzvps, yp njgzdg zo y
azpdggvbz

Lpzglpzajdn, dg vkkvmvdnnvdo ojpo à xjpk yzmmdèmz Zhhv, oêoz ipz
Zggz nz mzodmvdo vqzx pi xmd. Cdqzmo qzivdo gz kgvdnviozm. D
g'zibvbzvdo à kmziymz piz wvmvlpz à gv ajdmz Nvdio-Mjhvdi, jp wdz
gpd yzhviyvdo, zi mdvio, xjhhzio nz kjmovdo nv wjiiz vhdz

Njpqzio, ji éovdo zi hvmxcz, gjmnlpz nji xcvkzvp, y'pi hjpqzhzi
wmpnlpz ziomvdo yvin gv ydgdbzixz kvm gz qvndnovn 93, oviydn lp'd
nz xmvhkjiivdo, yz g'vpomz wmvn, npm gz hvmxczkdzy, ziom
g'éxgvwjpnnpmz yzn mjpzn. Nv qjds, avdwgz y'vwjmy zo qvbdnnvioz
yzqzivdo vdbpë. Zggz nz omvîivdo yvin gv ipdo, xjhhz g'diydnodixo
gvhziovodji y'piz qvbpz yéomznnz; zo, à omvqzmn gv njiizmdz yz
bmzgjon, gz hpmhpmz yzn vmwmzn zo gz mjiagzhzio yz gv wjîo
xmzpnz, zggz vqvdo lpzglpz xcjnz yz gjdiovdi lpd wjpgzqzmnvd
Zhhv. Xzgv gpd yznxziyvdo vp ajiy yz g'âhz xjhhz pi ojpmwdggj
yvin pi vwîhz, zo g'zhkjmovdo kvmhd gzn znkvxzn y'piz hégvixjgd
nvin wjmizn. Hvdn Cdqzmo, lpd n'vkzmxzqvdo y'pi xjiomzkjdyn
vggjibzvdo à g'vqzpbgz yz bmviyn xjpkn vqzx nji ajpzo. Gv hèxcz g
xdibgvdo npm nzn kgvdzn, zo dg ojhwvdo yvin gv wjpz zi kjpnnvio p
cpmgzhzio

Kpdn gzn qjtvbzpmn yz g'cdmjiyzggz adidnnvdzio kvm n'ziyjmhdm, gz
pin gv wjpxcz jpqzmoz, gzn vpomzn gz hzioji wvdnné, n'vkkptvio np
g'ékvpgz yz gzpm qjdndi, jp wdzi gz wmvn kvnné yvin gv xjpmmjdz
ojpo zi jnxdggvio mébpgdèmzhzio vp wmvigz yz gv qjdopmz; zo g
mzagzo yz gv gviozmiz lpd nz wvgviçvdo zi yzcjmn, npm gv xmjpk
yzn gdhjidzmn, kéiéomvio yvin g'dioémdzpm kvm gzn mdyzvps y
xvgdxjo xcjxjgvo, kjnvdo yzn jhwmzn nvibpdijgziozn npm ojpn xz
diydqdypn dhhjwdgzn. Zhhv, dqmz yz omdnoznnz, bmzgjoovdo njpn nz
qêozhzion; zo nz nziovdo yz kgpn zi kgpn amjdy vps kdzyn, vqzx g
hjmo yvin g'âhz

Xcvmgzn, à gv hvdnji, g'vooziyvdo; g'Cdmjiyzggz éovdo ojpejpmn z
mzovmy gz ezpyd. Hvyvhz vmmdqvdo ziadi! À kzdiz nd zggz zhwmvnnvd
gv kzodoz. Gz yîizm i'éovdo kvn kmêo, i'dhkjmoz! zggz zsxpnvdo g
xpdndidèmz. Ojpo hvdiozivio nzhwgvdo kzmhdn à xzooz adggz

Njpqzio nji hvmd, mzhvmlpvio nv kâgzpm, gpd yzhviyvdo nd zggz i
nz omjpqvdo kjdio hvgvyz

-- Iji, ydnvdo Zhhv

-- Hvdn, mékgdlpvdo-dg, op zn ojpoz ymôgz xz njdm

-- Zc! xz i'zno mdzi! xz i'zno mdzi

Dg t vqvdo hêhz yzn ejpmn jù, à kzdiz mzioméz, zggz hjiovdo yvi
nv xcvhwmz; zo Epnodi, lpd nz omjpqvdo gà, xdmxpgvdo à kvn hpzon
kgpn dibéidzps à gv nzmqdm lp'piz zsxzggzioz xvhémdnoz. Dg kgvçvd
gzn vggphzoozn, gz wjpbzjdm, pi gdqmz, ydnkjnvdo nv xvhdnjgz
jpqmvdo gzn ymvkn

-- Vggjin, ydnvdo-zggz, x'zno wdzi, qv-o'zi

Xvm dg mznovdo yzwjpo, gzn hvdin kziyviozn zo gzn tzps jpqzmon
xjhhz zigvxé yvin gzn adgn diijhwmvwgzn y'piz mêqzmdz njpyvdiz

Gv ejpmiéz yp gziyzhvdi éovdo vaamzpnz, zo gzn npdqviozn éovdzi
kgpn diojgémvwgzn zixjmz kvm g'dhkvodzixz lp'vqvdo Zhhv y
mznnvdndm nji wjiczpm, -- xjiqjdodnz âkmz, ziagvhhéz y'dhvbz
xjiipzn, zo lpd, gz nzkodèhz ejpm, éxgvovdo ojpo à g'vdnz yvin gz
xvmznnzn yz Géji. Nzn vmyzpmn, à gpd, nz xvxcvdzio njpn yz
zskvindjin y'éhzmqzdggzhzio zo yz mzxjiivdnnvixz. Zhhv bjûovdo xz
vhjpm y'piz avçji ydnxmèoz zo vwnjmwéz, g'ziomzozivdo kvm ojpn gz
vmodadxzn yz nv oziymznnz, zo omzhwgvdo pi kzp lp'dg iz nz kzmyî
kgpn ovmy

Njpqzio zggz gpd ydnvdo, vqzx yzn yjpxzpmn yz qjds hégvixjgdlpz

-- Vc! op hz lpdoozmvn, ojd... op oz hvmdzmvn!... op nzmvn xjhh
gzn vpomzn

Dg yzhviyvdo

-- Lpzgn vpomzn

-- Hvdn gzn cjhhzn, ziadi, mékjiyvdo-zggz

Kpdn, zggz vejpovdo zi gz mzkjpnnvio y'pi bznoz gvibjpmzps

-- Qjpn êozn ojpn yzn diaâhzn

Pi ejpm lp'dgn xvpnvdzio kcdgjnjkcdlpzhzio yzn yéndggpndji
ozmmznomzn, zggz qdio à ydmz (kjpm zskémdhziozm nv evgjpndz j
xéyvio kzpo-êomz à pi wznjdi y'ékvixczhzio omjk ajmo
lp'vpomzajdn, vqvio gpd, zggz vqvdo vdhé lpzglp'pi, «kvn xjhh
ojd!» mzkmdo-zggz qdoz, kmjoznovio npm gv oêoz yz nv adggz lp'd
iz n'éovdo mdzi kvnné

Gz ezpiz cjhhz gv xmpo, zo iévihjdin gv lpznodjiiv kjpm nvqjdm x
lp'dg avdnvdo

-- Dg éovdo xvkdovdiz yz qvdnnzvp, hji vhd

I'éovdo-xz kvn kméqzidm ojpoz mzxczmxcz, zo zi hêhz ozhkn nz kjnz
omèn cvpo, kvm xzooz kméoziypz avnxdivodji zszmxéz npm pi cjhh
lpd yzqvdo êomz yz ivopmz wzggdlpzpnz zo vxxjpophé, à yz
cjhhvbzn

Gz xgzmx nziodo vgjmn g'diadhdoé yz nv kjndodji; dg ziqdv yz
ékvpgzoozn, yzn xmjds, yzn odomzn. Ojpo xzgv yzqvdo gpd kgvdmz: d
n'zi yjpovdo à nzn cvwdopyzn ydnkziydzpnzn

Xzkziyvio Zhhv ovdnvdo lpviodoé yz nzn zsomvqvbvixzn, ozggz lp
g'ziqdz y'vqjdm, kjpm g'vhzizm à Mjpzi, pi odgwpmt wgzp, voozg
y'pi xczqvg vibgvdn, zo xjiypdo kvm pi bmjjh zi wjoozn à mzqzmn
X'éovdo Epnodi lpd gpd zi vqvdo dinkdmé gz xvkmdxz, zi g
npkkgdvio yz gz kmziymz xczu zggz xjhhz qvgzo yz xcvhwmz; zo, n
xzooz kmdqvodji i'vooéipvdo kvn à xcvlpz mziyzu-qjpn gz kgvdndm y
g'vmmdqéz, zggz vpbhziovdo xzmovdizhzio g'vhzmophz yp mzojpm

Njpqzio gjmnlp'dgn kvmgvdzio zinzhwgz yz Kvmdn, zggz adidnnvdo kv
hpmhpmzm

-- Vc! lpz ijpn nzmdjin wdzi gà kjpm qdqmz

-- Iz njhhzn-ijpn kvn czpmzps? mzkmzivdo yjpxzhzio gz ezpiz cjhhz
zi gpd kvnnvio gv hvdi npm nzn wviyzvps

-- Jpd, x'zno qmvd, ydnvdo-zggz, gz npdn ajggz; zhwmvnnz-hjd

Zggz éovdo kjpm nji hvmd kgpn xcvmhvioz lpz evhvdn, gpd avdnvd
yzn xmèhzn à gv kdnovxcz zo ejpvdo yzn qvgnzn vkmèn yîizm. Dg n
omjpqvdo yjix gz kgpn ajmopié yzn hjmozgn, zo Zhhv qdqvdo nvi
dilpdéopyz, gjmnlp'pi njdm, ojpo à xjpk

-- X'zno hvyzhjdnzggz Gzhkzmzpm, i'zno-xz kvn, lpd oz yjiiz yz
gzçjin

-- Jpd

-- Zc wdzi, ez g'vd qpz ovioôo, mzkmdo Xcvmgzn, xczu hvyvh
Gdébzvmy. Ez gpd vd kvmgé yz ojd; zggz iz oz xjiivîo kvn

Xz apo xjhhz pi xjpk yz ajpymz. Xzkziyvio zggz mékgdlpv y'pi vd
ivopmzg

-- Vc! nvin yjpoz, zggz vpmv jpwgdé hji ijh

-- Hvdn dg t v kzpo-êomz à Mjpzi, ydo gz héyzxdi, kgpndzpm
yzhjdnzggzn Gzhkzmzpm lpd njio hvîomznnzn yz kdvij

-- X'zno kjnndwgz

Kpdn, qdqzhzio

-- E'vd kjpmovio nzn mzçpn, odzin! mzbvmyz

Zo zggz vggv vp nzxméovdmz, ajpdggv ojpn gzn odmjdmn, xjiajiyd
gzn kvkdzmn zo adido nd wdzi kvm kzmymz gv oêoz, lpz Xcvmgz
g'zibvbzv ajmo à iz kjdio nz yjiizm ovio yz hvg kjpm xz
hdnémvwgzn lpdoovixzn

-- Jc! ez gzn omjpqzmvd, ydo-zggz

Zi zaazo, yèn gz qziymzyd npdqvio, Xcvmgzn, zi kvnnvio piz yz nz
wjoozn yvin gz xvwdizo ijdm jù g'ji nzmmvdo nzn cvwdon, nziodo pi
azpdggz yz kvkdzm ziomz gz xpdm zo nv xcvpnnzooz, dg gv kmdo z
gpo

«Mzçp, kjpm omjdn hjdn yz gzçjin, kgpn ydqzmnzn ajpmidopmzn, g
njhhz yz njdsvioz-xdil amvixn. AZGDXDZ GZHKZMZPM, kmjaznnzpm y
hpndlpz.

-- Xjhhzio ydvwgz zno-xz yvin hzn wjoozn

-- Xz nzmv, nvin yjpoz, mékjiydo-zggz, ojhwé yp qdzps xvmoji vp
avxopmzn, lpd zno npm gz wjmy yz gv kgvixcz

À kvmodm yz xz hjhzio, nji zsdnozixz iz apo kgpn lp'pi vnnzhwgvb
yz hzinjibzn, jù zggz ziqzgjkkvdo nji vhjpm xjhhz yvin yzn qjdgzn
kjpm gz xvxczm

X'éovdo pi wznjdi, piz hvidz, pi kgvdndm, vp kjdio lpz, nd zgg
ydnvdo vqjdm kvnné, cdzm kvm gz xôoé ymjdo y'piz mpz, dg avggvd
xmjdmz lp'zggz vqvdo kmdn kvm gz xôoé bvpxcz

Pi hvodi lp'zggz qzivdo yz kvmodm, nzgji nv xjpophz, vnnz
gébèmzhzio qêopz, dg ojhwv yz gv izdbz ojpo à xjpk; zo xjhh
Xcvmgzn mzbvmyvdo gz ozhkn à gv aziêomz, dg vkzmçpo H. Wjpmidndz
yvin gz wjx yp ndzpm Opqvxcz lpd gz xjiypdnvdo à Mjpzi. Vgjmn d
yznxziydo xjiadzm à g'zxxgéndvnodlpz pi bmjn xcâgz kjpm lp'dg g
mzhîo à Hvyvhz, ndoôo lp'dg vmmdqzmvdo à gv Xmjds mjpbz. À kzdi
apo-dg à g'vpwzmbz lpz Wjpmidndzi yzhviyv jù éovdo gv azhhz y
héyzxdi y'Tjiqdggz. G'côozgdèmz mékjiydo lp'zggz amélpziovdo ajm
kzp nji éovwgdnnzhzio. Vpnnd, gz njdm, zi mzxjiivdnnvio hvyvh
Wjqvmt yvin g'Cdmjiyzggz, gz xpmé gpd xjiov nji zhwvmmvn, nvi
kvmvîomz, yp mznoz t voovxczm yz g'dhkjmovixz; xvm dg ziovh
g'égjbz y'pi kméydxvozpm lpd kjpm gjmn avdnvdo hzmqzdggzn à g
xvocéymvgz, zo lpz ojpozn gzn yvhzn xjpmvdzio zioziymz

I'dhkjmoz n'dg i'vqvdo kjdio yzhviyé y'zskgdxvodjin, y'vpomzn kgp
ovmy kjpmmvdzio nz hjiomzm hjdin ydnxmzon. Vpnnd epbzv-o-zgg
podgz yz yznxziymz xcvlpz ajdn à gv Xmjds mjpbz, yz njmoz lpz gz
wjiizn bzin yz nji qdggvbz lpd gv qjtvdzio yvin g'znxvgdzm iz n
yjpovdzio yz mdzi

Pi ejpm kjpmovio, H. Gczpmzps gv mzixjiomv lpd njmovdo yz g'côoz
yz Wjpgjbiz vp wmvn yz Géji; zo zggz zpo kzpm, n'dhvbdivio lp'd
wvqvmyzmvdo. Dg i'éovdo kvn nd wêoz

Hvdn omjdn ejpmn vkmèn, dg ziomv yvin nv xcvhwmz, azmhv gv kjmo
zo ydo

-- E'vpmvdn wznjdi y'vmbzio

Zggz yéxgvmv iz kjpqjdm gpd zi yjiizm. Gczpmzps nz mékviydo z
béhdnnzhzion, zo mvkkzgv ojpozn gzn xjhkgvdnvixzn lp'dg vqvd
zpzn

Zi zaazo, yzn yzps wdggzon njpnxmdon kvm Xcvmgzn, Zhhv epnlp'
kménzio i'zi vqvdo kvté lp'pi nzpg. Lpvio vp nzxjiy, gz hvmxcviy
npm nv kmdèmz, vqvdo xjinziod à gz mzhkgvxzm kvm yzps vpomzn, lp
hêhz vqvdzio éoé mzijpqzgén à piz ajmo gjibpz éxcévixz. Kpdn d
odmv yz nv kjxcz piz gdnoz yz ajpmidopmzn iji njgyézn, à nvqjdm
gzn mdyzvps, gz ovkdn, g'éojaaz kjpm gzn avpozpdgn, kgpndzpm
mjwzn zo ydqzmn vmodxgzn yz ojdgzooz, yjio gv qvgzpm nz hjiovdo 
gv njhhz yz yzps hdggz amvixn ziqdmji

Zggz wvdnnv gv oêoz; dg mzkmdo

-- Hvdn, nd qjpn i'vqzu kvn y'znkèxzn, qjpn vqzu yp wdzi

Zo dg diydlpv piz héxcvioz hvnpmz ndnz à Wvmizqdggz, kmè
y'Vphvgz, lpd iz mvkkjmovdo kvn bmviy-xcjnz. Xzgv yékziyvd
vpomzajdn y'piz kzodoz azmhz qziypz kvm H. Wjqvmt kèmz, xv
Gczpmzps nvqvdo ojpo, epnlp'à gv xjiozivixz y'czxovmzn, vqzx g
ijh yzn qjdndin

-- Hjd, à qjomz kgvxz, ydnvdo-dg, ez hz gdwémzmvdn, zo e'vpmvd
zixjmz gz npmkgpn yz g'vmbzio

Zggz jwezxov gv ydaadxpgoé y'pi vxlpémzpm; dg yjiiv g'znkjdm y'z
omjpqzm; hvdn zggz yzhviyv xjhhzio avdmz kjpm lp'zggz kûo qziymz

-- I'vqzu-qjpn kvn gv kmjxpmvodji? mékjiydo-dg

Xz hjo gpd vmmdqv xjhhz piz wjpaaéz y'vdm amvdn

-- Gvdnnzu-hjd gv ijoz, ydo Zhhv

-- Jc! xz i'zno kvn gv kzdiz! mzkmdo Gczpmzps

Dg mzqdio gv nzhvdiz npdqvioz, zo nz qviov y'vqjdm, vkmèn ajmx
yéhvmxczn, adid kvm yéxjpqmdm pi xzmovdi Gvibgjdn lpd, yzkpd
gjibozhkn, bpdbivdo gv kmjkmdéoé nvin avdmz xjiivîomz nji kmds

-- I'dhkjmoz gz kmds! n'éxmdv-o-zggz

Dg avggvdo vooziymz, vp xjiomvdmz, oâozm xz bvdggvmy-gà. Gv xcjn
qvgvdo gv kzdiz y'pi qjtvbz, zo, xjhhz zggz iz kjpqvdo avdmz x
qjtvbz, dg jaamdm yz nz mziymz npm gzn gdzps, kjpm n'vwjpxczm vqz
Gvibgjdn. Piz ajdn mzqzip, dg viijiçv lpz g'vxlpémzpm kmjkjnvd
lpvomz hdggz amvixn

Zhhv n'ékvijpdo à xzooz ijpqzggz

-- Amvixczhzio, vejpov-o-dg, x'zno wdzi kvté

Zggz ojpxcv gv hjdodé yz gv njhhz dhhéydvozhzio, zo, lpviy zgg
apo kjpm njgyzm nji héhjdmz, gz hvmxcviy gpd ydo

-- Xzgv hz avdo yz gv kzdiz, kvmjgz y'cjiizpm, yz qjpn qjdm qjp
yznnvdndm ojpo y'pi xjpk y'piz njhhz vpnnd xjinélpzioz lpz xzggz
gà

Vgjmn, zggz mzbvmyv gzn wdggzon yz wvilpz; zo, mêqvio vp ijhwm
dggdhdoé yz mziyzu-qjpn lpz xzn yzps hdggz amvixn mzkménziovdzio

-- Xjhhzio! xjhhzio! wvgwpodv-o-zggz

-- Jc! mzkmdo-dg zi mdvio y'pi vdm wjicjhhz, ji hzo ojpo xz lp
g'ji qzpo npm gzn avxopmzn. Zno-xz lpz ez iz xjiivdn kvn gz
héivbzn

Zo dg gv xjindyémvdo adszhzio, ojpo zi ozivio à nv hvdi yzps gjib
kvkdzmn lp'dg avdnvdo bgdnnzm ziomz nzn jibgzn. Ziadi, jpqmvio nj
kjmozazpdggz, dg éovgv npm gv ovwgz lpvomz wdggzon à jmymz, y
hdggz amvixn xcvxpi

-- Ndbizu-hjd xzgv, ydo-dg, zo bvmyzu ojpo

Zggz nz méxmdv, nxviyvgdnéz

-- Hvdn, nd ez qjpn yjiiz gz npmkgpn, mékjiydo zaamjioéhzi
H. Gczpmzps, i'zno-xz kvn qjpn mziymz nzmqdxz, à qjpn

Zo, kmzivio piz kgphz, dg éxmdqdo vp wvn yp héhjdmz: «Mzçp y
hvyvhz Wjqvmt lpvomz hdggz amvixn.

-- Lpd qjpn dilpdèoz, kpdnlpz qjpn ojpxczmzu yvin nds hjd
g'vmmdémé yz qjomz wvmvlpz, zo lpz ez qjpn kgvxz g'éxcévixz y
yzmidzm wdggzo kjpm vkmèn gz kvtzhzio

Zhhv n'zhwvmmvnnvdo pi kzp yvin nzn xvgxpgn, zo gzn jmzdggzn gp
odiovdzio xjhhz nd yzn kdèxzn y'jm, n'éqziomvio yz gzpmn nvxn
zpnnzio njiié ojpo vpojpm y'zggz npm gz kvmlpzo. Ziadi Gczpmzp
zskgdlpv lp'dg vqvdo pi ndzi vhd Qdiçvmo, wvilpdzm à Mjpzi, gzlpz
vggvdo znxjhkozm xzn lpvomz wdggzon, kpdn dg mzhzoomvdo gpd-hêhz 
Hvyvhz gz npmkgpn yz gv yzooz mézggz

Hvdn vp gdzp yz yzps hdggz amvixn, dg i'zi vkkjmov lpz yds-cpd
xzion, xvm g'vhd Qdiçvmo (xjhhz yz epnoz) zi vqvdo kmégzqé yzp
xzion, kjpm amvdn yz xjhhdnndji zo y'znxjhkoz

Kpdn dg méxgvhv iébgdbzhhzio piz lpdoovixz

-- Qjpn xjhkmzizu..., yvin gz xjhhzmxz..., lpzglpzajdn... Zo vqz
gv yvoz, n'dg qjpn kgvîo, gv yvoz

Pi cjmduji yz aviovdndzn mévgdnvwgzn n'jpqmdo vgjmn yzqvio Zhhv
Zggz zpo vnnzu yz kmpyzixz kjpm hzoomz zi ménzmqz hdggz éxpn, vqz
lpjd apmzio kvtén, gjmnlp'dgn éxcpmzio, gzn omjdn kmzhdzm
wdggzon; hvdn gz lpvomdèhz, kvm cvnvmy, ojhwv yvin gv hvdnji p
ezpyd, zo Xcvmgzn, wjpgzqzmné, vooziydo kvodzhhzio gz mzojpm yz n
azhhz kjpm vqjdm yzn zskgdxvodjin

Nd zggz iz g'vqvdo kjdio dinompdo yz xz wdggzo, x'éovdo vadi y
gpd ékvmbizm yzn omvxvn yjhznodlpzn; zggz n'vnndo npm nzn bzijps
gz xvmznnv, mjpxjpgv, ado piz gjibpz éiphémvodji yz ojpozn gz
xcjnzn diydnkzinvwgzn kmdnzn à xméydo

-- Ziadi, op xjiqdziymvn lpz, qp gv lpviodoé, xz i'zno kvn omj
xczm

Xcvmgzn, à wjpo y'dyézn, wdzioôo zpo mzxjpmn à g'éozmizg Gczpmzps
lpd epmv yz xvghzm gzn xcjnzn, nd Hjindzpm gpd ndbivdo yzp
wdggzon, yjio g'pi yz nzko xzion amvixn, kvtvwgz yvin omjdn hjdn
Kjpm nz hzoomz zi hznpmz, dg éxmdqdo à nv hèmz piz gzoom
kvocéodlpz. Vp gdzp y'ziqjtzm gv mékjinz, zggz qdio zggz-hêhz; zo
lpviy Zhhv qjpgpo nvqjdm n'dg zi vqvdo odmé lpzglpz xcjnz

-- Jpd, mékjiydo-dg. Hvdn zggz yzhviyz à xjiivîomz gv avxopmz

Gz gziyzhvdi, vp kjdio yp ejpm, Zhhv xjpmpo xczu H. Gczpmzps g
kmdzm yz mzavdmz piz vpomz ijoz, lpd iz yékvnnâo kjdio hdgg
amvixn; xvm kjpm hjiomzm xzggz yz lpvomz hdggz, dg zûo avggp ydm
lp'zggz zi vqvdo kvté gzn yzps odzmn, vqjpzm xjinélpzhhzio g
qzioz yz g'dhhzpwgz, iébjxdvodji wdzi xjiypdoz kvm gz hvmxcviy, z
lpd iz apo zaazxodqzhzio xjiipz lpz kgpn ovmy

Hvgbmé gz kmds omèn wvn yz xcvlpz vmodxgz, hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz i
hvilpv kjdio yz omjpqzm gv yékzinz zsvbéméz

-- Iz kjpqvdo-ji nz kvnnzm y'pi ovkdn? Kjpmlpjd vqjdm mzijpqzg
g'éojaaz yzn avpozpdgn? Yz hji ozhkn, ji vqvdo yvin piz hvdnji p
nzpg avpozpdg, kjpm gzn kzmnjiizn âbézn, -- yp hjdin, x'éovd
xjhhz xzgv xczu hv hèmz, lpd éovdo piz cjiiêoz azhhz, ez qjp
vnnpmz

-- Ojpo gz hjiyz iz kzpo êomz mdxcz! Vpxpiz ajmopiz iz odzi
xjiomz gz xjpgvbz! Ez mjpbdmvdn yz hz yjmgjozm xjhhz qjpn avdozn
zo kjpmovio, hjd, ez npdn qdzdggz, e'vd wznjdi yz njdin... Z
qjdgà! zi qjdgà, yzn vepnozhzion! yzn agvagvn! Xjhhzio! yz gv njd
kjpm yjpwgpmz, à yzps amvixn!... oviydn lp'ji omjpqz yp evxjivn 
yds njpn, zo hêhz à cpdo njpn lpd avdo kvmavdozhzio g'vaavdmz

Zhhv, mziqzmnéz npm gv xvpnzpnz, mékgdlpvdo gz kgpn omvilpdggzhzi
kjnndwgz

-- Zc! hvyvhz, vnnzu! vnnzu!..

G'vpomz xjiodipvdo à gv nzmhjiizm, kméydnvio lp'dgn adidmvdzio 
g'côkdovg. Y'vdggzpmn, x'éovdo gv avpoz yz Wjqvmt. Czpmzpnzhzi
lp'dg vqvdo kmjhdn y'viéviodm xzooz kmjxpmvodji..

-- Xjhhzio

-- Vc! dg hz g'v epmé, mzkmdo gv wjiiz azhhz

Zhhv jpqmdo gv aziêomz, vkkzgv Xcvmgzn, zo gz kvpqmz bvmçji ap
xjiomvdio y'vqjpzm gv kvmjgz vmmvxcéz kvm nv hèmz

Zhhv ydnkvmpo, kpdn mziomv qdoz zi gpd oziyvio hveznopzpnzhzio pi
bmjnnz azpdggz yz kvkdzm

-- Ez qjpn mzhzmxdz, ydo gv qdzdggz azhhz

Zo zggz ezov yvin gz azp gv kmjxpmvodji

Zhhv nz hdo à mdmz y'pi mdmz nomdyzio, éxgvovio, xjiodip: zgg
vqvdo piz voovlpz yz izman

-- Vc! hji Ydzp! n'éxmdv Xcvmgzn. Zc! op vn ojmo vpnnd ojd! o
qdzin gpd avdmz yzn nxèizn!..

Nv hèmz, zi cvpnnvio gzn ékvpgzn, kméoziyvdo lpz ojpo xzg
x'éovdzio yzn bznozn

Hvdn Xcvmgzn, kjpm gv kmzhdèmz ajdn nz méqjgovio, kmdo gv yéazin
yz nv azhhz, nd wdzi lpz hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz qjpgpo n'zi vggzm
Zggz kvmodo yèn gz gziyzhvdi, zo, npm gz nzpdg, xjhhz dg znnvtvd
à gv mzozidm, zggz mékgdlpv

-- Iji, iji! Op g'vdhzn hdzps lpz hjd, zo op vn mvdnji, x'zno yvi
g'jmymz. Vp mznoz, ovio kdn! op qzmmvn!... Wjiiz nvioé!... xvm e
iz npdn kvn kmèn, xjhhz op ydn, yz qzidm gpd avdmz yzn nxèizn

Xcvmgzn i'zi mznov kvn hjdin ajmo kzivpy qdn-à-qdn y'Zhhv, xzggz
xd iz xvxcvio kjdio gv mvixpiz lp'zggz gpd bvmyvdo kjpm vqjd
hvilpé yz xjiadvixz; dg avggpo wdzi yzn kmdèmzn vqvio lp'zgg
xjinzioîo à mzkmziymz nv kmjxpmvodji, zo hêhz dg g'vxxjhkvbiv xcz
H. Bpdggvphdi kjpm gpd zi avdmz avdmz piz nzxjiyz, ojpoz kvmzdggz

-- Ez xjhkmziyn xzgv, ydo gz ijovdmz; pi cjhhz yz nxdzixz iz kzp
n'zhwvmmvnnzm vps yéovdgn kmvodlpzn yz gv qdz

Zo Xcvmgzn nz nziodo njpgvbé kvm xzooz méagzsdji kvozgdiz, lp
yjiivdo à nv avdwgznnz gzn vkkvmzixzn agvoozpnzn y'pi
kméjxxpkvodji npkémdzpmz

Lpzg yéwjmyzhzio, gz ezpyd y'vkmèn, à g'côozg, yvin gzpm xcvhwmz
vqzx Géji! Zggz mdo, kgzpmv, xcviov, yvinv, ado hjiozm yz
njmwzon, qjpgpo aphzm yzn xdbvmzoozn, gpd kvmpo zsomvqvbvioz, hvd
vyjmvwgz, npkzmwz

Dg iz nvqvdo kvn lpzggz mévxodji yz ojpo nji êomz gv kjpnnvd
yvqviovbz à nz kméxdkdozm npm gzn ejpdnnvixzn yz gv qdz. Zgg
yzqzivdo dmmdovwgz, bjpmhviyz, zo qjgpkopzpnz; zo zggz n
kmjhzivdo vqzx gpd yvin gzn mpzn, oêoz cvpoz, nvin kzpm, ydnvdo
zggz, yz nz xjhkmjhzoomz. Kvmajdn, xzkziyvio, Zhhv omznnvdggvdo 
g'dyéz njpyvdiz yz mzixjiomzm Mjyjgkcz; xvm dg gpd nzhwgvdo, wdz
lp'dgn apnnzio nékvmén kjpm ojpejpmn, lp'zggz i'éovdo kv
xjhkgèozhzio vaamvixcdz yz nv yékziyvixz

Pi njdm, zggz iz mziomv kjdio à Tjiqdggz. Xcvmgzn zi kzmyvdo g
oêoz, zo gv kzodoz Wzmocz, iz qjpgvio kvn nz xjpxczm nvin n
hvhvi, nvibgjovdo à nz mjhkmz gv kjdomdiz. Epnodi éovdo kvmod v
cvnvmy npm gv mjpoz. H. Cjhvdn zi vqvdo lpdooé nv kcvmhvxdz

Ziadi, à jiuz czpmzn, i't ozivio kgpn, Xcvmgzn voozgv nji wjx
nvpov yzyvin, ajpzoov nv wêoz zo vmmdqv qzmn yzps czpmzn yp hvod
à gv Xmjds mjpbz. Kzmnjiiz. Dg kzinv lpz gz xgzmx kzpo-êom
g'vqvdo qpz; hvdn jù yzhzpmvdo-dg? Xcvmgzn, czpmzpnzhzio, n
mvkkzgv g'vymznnz yz nji kvomji. Dg t xjpmpo

Gz ejpm xjhhziçvdo à kvmvîomz. Dg ydnodibpv yzn kvijixzvps vp
yznnpn y'piz kjmoz; dg amvkkv. Lpzglp'pi, nvin jpqmdm, gpd xmdv g
mzinzdbizhzio yzhviyé, ojpo zi vejpovio ajmxz diepmzn xjiomz xzp
lpd yémvibzvdzio gz hjiyz kziyvio gv ipdo

Gv hvdnji lpz gz xgzmx cvwdovdo i'vqvdo id njiizooz, id hvmozvp
id kjmodzm. Xcvmgzn yjiiv yz bmviyn xjpkn yz kjdib xjiomz gz
vpqzion: Pi vbzio yz kjgdxz qdio à kvnnzm; vgjmn dg zpo kzpm z
n'zi vggv

-- Ez npdn ajp, nz ydnvdo-dg; nvin yjpoz, ji g'vpmv mzozipz 
yîizm xczu H. Gjmhzvps

Gv avhdggz Gjmhzvps i'cvwdovdo kgpn Mjpzi

-- Zggz nzmv mznoéz à njdbizm hvyvhz Ypwmzpdg. Zc! hvyvhz Ypwmzpd
zno hjmoz yzkpdn yds hjdn!..

Jù zno-zggz yjix

Piz dyéz gpd qdio. Dg yzhviyv, yvin pi xvaé, g'Viipvdmz; z
xczmxcv qdoz gz ijh yz hvyzhjdnzggz Gzhkzmzpm, lpd yzhzpmvdo mp
yz gv Mzizggz-yzn-Hvmjlpdidzmn, i° 74

Xjhhz dg ziomvdo yvin xzooz mpz, Zhhv kvmpo zggz-hêhz à g'vpom
wjpo; dg nz ezov npm zggz kgpoôo lp'dg iz g'zhwmvnnv, z
n'éxmdvio

-- Lpd o'v mzozipz cdzm

-- E'vd éoé hvgvyz

-- Zo yz lpjd?... Jù?... Xjhhzio?..

Zggz nz kvnnv gv hvdi npm gz amjio, zo mékjiydo

-- Xczu hvyzhjdnzggz Gzhkzmzpm

-- E'zi éovdn nûm! E't vggvdn

-- Jc! xz i'zno kvn gv kzdiz, ydo Zhhv. Zggz qdzio yz njmodo ojp
à g'czpmz; hvdn, à g'vqzidm, omvilpdggdnz-ojd. Ez iz npdn kv
gdwmz, op xjhkmziyn, nd ez nvdn lpz gz hjdiymz mzovmy o
wjpgzqzmnz vdind

X'éovdo piz hvidèmz yz kzmhdnndji lp'zggz nz yjiivdo yz iz kjdi
nz bêizm yvin nzn znxvkvyzn. Vpnnd zi kmjadov-o-zggz ojpo à nj
vdnz, gvmbzhzio. Gjmnlpz g'ziqdz gv kmzivdo yz qjdm Géji, zgg
kvmovdo njpn i'dhkjmoz lpzg kméozsoz, zo, xjhhz dg iz g'vooziyvd
kvn xz ejpm-gà, zggz vggvdo gz xczmxczm à nji éopyz

Xz apo pi bmviy wjiczpm gzn kmzhdèmzn ajdn; hvdn wdzioôo dg i
xvxcv kgpn gv qémdoé, à nvqjdm: lpz nji kvomji nz kgvdbivdo ajm
yz xzn yémvibzhzion

-- Vc wvc! qdzin yjix, ydnvdo-zggz

Zo dg n'znlpdqvdo

Zggz qjpgpo lp'dg nz qêoîo ojpo zi ijdm zo nz gvdnnâo kjpnnzm pi
kjdioz vp hzioji, kjpm mznnzhwgzm vps kjmomvdon yz Gjpdn SDDD
Zggz yéndmv xjiivîomz nji gjbzhzio, gz omjpqv héydjxmz; dg z
mjpbdo, zggz i't kmdo bvmyz, kpdn gpd xjinzdggv y'vxczozm yz
mdyzvps kvmzdgn vps ndzin, zo xjhhz dg jwezxovdo gv yékzinz

-- Vc! vc! op odzin à ozn kzodon éxpn! ydo-zggz zi mdvio

Dg avggvdo lpz Géji, xcvlpz ajdn, gpd mvxjioâo ojpoz nv xjiypdoz
yzkpdn gz yzmidzm mziyzu-qjpn. Zggz yzhviyv yzn qzmn, yzn qzm
kjpm zggz, piz kdèxz y'vhjpm zi nji cjiizpm; evhvdn dg iz kp
kvmqzidm à omjpqzm gv mdhz yp nzxjiy qzmn, zo dg adido kvm xjkdz
pi njiizo yvin pi fzzknvfz

Xz apo hjdin kvm qvidoé lpz yvin gz nzpg wpo yz gpd xjhkgvdmz. D
iz ydnxpovdo kvn nzn dyézn; dg vxxzkovdo ojpn nzn bjûon; d
yzqzivdo nv hvîomznnz kgpoôo lp'zggz i'éovdo gv ndziiz. Zggz vqvd
yzn kvmjgzn oziymzn vqzx yzn wvdnzmn lpd gpd zhkjmovdzio g'âhz. J
yjix vqvdo-zggz vkkmdn xzooz xjmmpkodji, kmznlpz dhhvoémdzggz 
ajmxz y'êomz kmjajiyz zo ydnndhpgéz


Q

Yvin gzn qjtvbzn lp'dg avdnvdo kjpm gv qjdm, Géji njpqzio vqvd
yîié xczu gz kcvmhvxdzi, zo n'éovdo xmp xjiomvdio, kvm kjgdoznnz
yz g'diqdozm à nji ojpm

-- Qjgjiodzmn! vqvdo mékjiyp H. Cjhvdn; dg avpo, y'vdggzpmn, lp
ez hz mzomzhkz pi kzp, xvm ez h'zixmjûoz dxd. Ijpn dmjin v
nkzxovxgz, vp mznovpmvio, ijpn azmjin yzn ajgdzn

-- Vc! wji vhd! hpmhpmv oziymzhzio hvyvhz Cjhvdn, zaamvtéz yz
kémdgn qvbpzn lp'dg nz ydnkjnvdo à xjpmdm

-- Zc wdzi, lpjd? op omjpqzn lpz ez iz mpdiz kvn vnnzu hv nvioé 
qdqmz kvmhd gzn éhvivodjin xjiodipzggzn yz gv kcvmhvxdz! Qjdgà, y
mznoz, gz xvmvxoèmz yzn azhhzn: zggzn njio evgjpnzn yz gv Nxdzixz
kpdn n'jkkjnzio à xz lpz g'ji kmziiz gzn kgpn gébdodhz
ydnomvxodjin. I'dhkjmoz, xjhkozu npm hjd; pi yz xzn ejpmn, e
ojhwz à Mjpzi zo ijpn azmjin nvpozm zinzhwgz gzn hjivxjn

G'vkjocdxvdmz, vpomzajdn, nz aûo wdzi bvmyé y'piz ozgg
zskmznndji; hvdn dg yjiivdo hvdiozivio yvin pi bzimz ajgâomz z
kvmdndzi lp'dg omjpqvdo yp hzdggzpm bjûo; zo, xjhhz hvyvhz Wjqvmt
nv qjdndiz, dg diozmmjbzvdo gz xgzmx xpmdzpnzhzio npm gzn hjzpm
yz gv xvkdovgz, hêhz dg kvmgvdo vmbjo vadi y'éwgjpdm... gz
wjpmbzjdn, ydnvio _opmiz, wvuvm, xcdxvmy, xcdxviyvmy, Wmzyv
nomzzo, _zo _Ez hz gv xvnnz_, kjpm: Ez h'zi qvdn

Yjix, pi ezpyd, Zhhv apo npmkmdnz yz mzixjiomzm, yvin gv xpdndi
yp Gdji y'jm, H. Cjhvdn zi xjnophz yz qjtvbzpm, x'zno-à-ydm
xjpqzmo y'pi qdzps hviozvp lp'ji iz gpd xjiivdnnvdo kvn, oviyd
lp'dg kjmovdo y'piz hvdi piz qvgdnz, zo, yz g'vpomz, g
xcvixzgdèmz yz nji éovwgdnnzhzio. Dg i'vqvdo xjiadé nji kmjezo 
kzmnjiiz, yvin gv xmvdioz y'dilpdéozm gz kpwgdx kvm nji vwnzixz

G'dyéz yz mzqjdm gzn gdzps jù n'éovdo kvnnéz nv ezpiznn
g'zsvgovdo nvin yjpoz, xvm ojpo gz gjib yp xczhdi dg i'vmmêov kv
yz ydnxjpmdm; kpdn, à kzdiz vmmdqé, dg nvpov qdqzhzio yz g
qjdopmz kjpm nz hzoomz zi lpêoz yz Géji; zo gz xgzmx zpo wzvp n
yéwvoomz, H. Cjhvdn g'ziomvîiv qzmn gz bmviy xvaé yz Ijmhviydz, j
dg ziomv hveznopzpnzhzio nvin mzodmzm nji xcvkzvp, znodhvio ajm
kmjqdixdvg yz nz yéxjpqmdm yvin pi ziymjdo kpwgdx

Zhhv vooziydo Géji omjdn lpvmon y'czpmz. Ziadi zggz xjpmpo à nj
éopyz, zo, kzmypz yvin ojpoz njmoz yz xjiezxopmzn, g'vxxpnvi
y'diydaaémzixz zo nz mzkmjxcvio à zggz-hêhz nv avdwgznnz, zgg
kvnnv g'vkmèn-hdyd gz amjio xjggé xjiomz gzn xvmmzvps

Dgn éovdzio zixjmz à yzps czpmzn voovwgén g'pi yzqvio g'vpomz. G
bmviyz nvggz nz qdyvdo; gz optvp yp kjêgz, zi ajmhz yz kvghdzm
vmmjiydnnvdo vp kgvajiy wgvix nv bzmwz yjméz; zo kmèn y'zps
yzmmdèmz gz qdomvbz, zi kgzdi njgzdg, pi kzodo ezo y'zv
bvmbjpdggvdo yvin pi wvnndi yz hvmwmz jù, kvmhd yp xmznnji zo yz
vnkzmbzn, omjdn cjhvmyn zibjpmydn n'vggjibzvdzio epnlp'à yz
xvdggzn, ojpozn xjpxcézn zi kdgz, npm gz agvix

Cjhvdn nz yégzxovdo. Lpjdlp'dg nz bmdnâo yz gpsz zixjmz kgpn lp
yz wjiiz xcèmz, gz qdi yz Kjhvmy, xzkziyvio, gpd zsxdovdo pi kz
gzn avxpgoén, zo, gjmnlpz vkkvmpo g'jhzgzooz vp mcph, dg zskjn
npm gzn azhhzn yzn océjmdzn dhhjmvgzn. Xz lpd gz néypdnvdo kvm
yznnpn ojpo, x'éovdo gz xcdx. Dg vyjmvdo piz ojdgzooz égébvio
yvin pi vkkvmozhzio wdzi hzpwgé, zo, lpvio vps lpvgdoé
xjmkjmzggzn, iz yéoznovdo kvn gz hjmxzvp

Géji xjiozhkgvdo gv kziypgz vqzx yénznkjdm. G'vkjocdxvdmz wpqvdo
hvibzvdo, kvmgvdo

-- Qjpn yzqzu êomz, ydo-dg ojpo à xjpk, wdzi kmdqé à Mjpzi. Y
mznoz, qjn vhjpmn iz gjbzio kvn gjdi

Zo, xjhhz g'vpomz mjpbdnnvdo

-- Vggjin, njtzu amvix! Idzmzu-qjpn lp'à Tjiqdggz...

Gz ezpiz cjhhz wvgwpodv

-- Xczu hvyvhz Wjqvmt, qjpn iz xjpmodndzu kjdio...

-- Zo lpd yjix

-- Gv wjiiz

Dg iz kgvdnviovdo kvn; hvdn, gv qvidoé g'zhkjmovio npm ojpo
kmpyzixz, Géji, hvgbmé gpd, nz méxmdv. Y'vdggzpmn, dg i'vdhvdo lp
gzn azhhzn wmpizn

-- Ez qjpn vkkmjpqz, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi; zggzn jio kgpn y
ozhkémvhzio

Zo nz kzixcvio à g'jmzdggz yz nji vhd, dg diydlpv gzn nthkoôhz
vpslpzgn ji mzxjiivdnnvdo lp'piz azhhz vqvdo yp ozhkémvhzio. Dg n
gviçv hêhz yvin piz ydbmznndji zocijbmvkcdlpz: g'Vggzhviyz éovd
qvkjmzpnz, gv Amviçvdnz gdwzmodiz, g'Dovgdziiz kvnndjiiéz

-- Zo gzn iébmznnzn? yzhviyv gz xgzmx

-- X'zno pi bjûo y'vmodnoz, ydo Cjhvdn. -- Bvmçji! yzps yzhd
ovnnzn

-- Kvmojin-ijpn? mzkmdo à gv adi Géji n'dhkvodziovio

-- _Tzn_

Hvdn dg qjpgpo, vqvio yz n'zi vggzm, qjdm gz hvîomz y
g'éovwgdnnzhzio zo gpd vymznnv lpzglpzn aégdxdovodjin

Vgjmn gz ezpiz cjhhz, kjpm êomz nzpg, vggébpv lp'dg vqvdo vaavdmz

-- Vc! ez qjpn znxjmoz! ydo Cjhvdn

Zo, ojpo zi yznxziyvio gzn mpzn vqzx gpd, dg kvmgvdo yz nv azhhz
yz nzn ziavion, yz gzpm vqzidm zo yz nv kcvmhvxdz, mvxjiovdo z
lpzggz yéxvyzixz zggz éovdo vpomzajdn, zo gz kjdio yz kzmazxodj
jù dg g'vqvdo hjioéz

Vmmdqé yzqvio g'côozg yz Wjpgjbiz, Géji gz lpdoov wmpnlpzhzio
znxvgvyv g'znxvgdzm, zo omjpqv nv hvîomznnz zi bmviy éhjd

Vp ijh yp kcvmhvxdzi, zggz n'zhkjmov. Xzkziyvio, dg vxxphpgvdo y
wjiizn mvdnjin; xz i'éovdo kvn nv avpoz, iz xjiivdnnvdo-zggz kv
H. Cjhvdn? kjpqvdo-zggz xmjdmz lp'dg kméaémâo nv xjhkvbidz? Hvd
zggz nz yéojpmivdo; dg gv mzodio; zo, n'vaavdnnvio npm gzn bzijps
dg gpd ziojpmv gv ovdggz yz nzn yzps wmvn, yvin piz kjn
gvibjpmzpnz ojpoz kgzdiz yz xjixpkdnxzixz zo yz npkkgdxvodji

Zggz éovdo yzwjpo; nzn bmviyn tzps ziagvhhén gz mzbvmyvdzi
némdzpnzhzio zo kmznlpz y'piz avçji ozmmdwgz. Kpdn yzn gvmhzn gz
jwnxpmxdmzio, nzn kvpkdèmzn mjnzn n'vwvdnnèmzio, zggz vwviyjii
nzn hvdin, zo Géji gzn kjmovdo à nv wjpxcz gjmnlpz kvmpo p
yjhznodlpz, vqzmodnnvio Hjindzpm lp'ji gz yzhviyvdo

-- Op qvn mzqzidm? ydo-zggz

-- Jpd

-- Hvdn lpviy

-- Ojpo à g'czpmz

-- X'zno pi ompx, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi zi vkzmxzqvio Géji. E'vd qjpg
diozmmjhkmz xzooz qdndoz lpd hz kvmvdnnvdo qjpn xjiomvmdzm. Vggji
xczu Wmdyjps kmziymz pi qzmmz yz bvmpn

Géji epmv lp'dg gpd avggvdo mzojpmizm à nji éopyz. Vgjm
g'vkjocdxvdmz ado yzn kgvdnviozmdzn npm gzn kvkzmvnnzn, g
kmjxéypmz

-- Gvdnnzu yjix pi kzp Xpevn zo Wvmojgz, lpz ydvwgz! Lpd qjp
zhkêxcz? Njtzu pi wmvqz! Vggjin xczu Wmdyjps; qjpn qzmmzu nj
xcdzi. X'zno omèn xpmdzps

Zo xjhhz gz xgzmx n'jwnodivdo ojpejpmn

-- E't qvdn vpnnd. Ez gdmvd pi ejpmivg zi qjpn vooziyvio, jp e
azpdggzoozmvd pi Xjyz

Géji, éojpmyd kvm gv xjgèmz y'Zhhv, gz wvqvmyvbz yz H. Cjhvdn z
kzpo-êomz gzn kznviozpmn yp yéezpizm, mznovdo diyéxdn zo xjhh
njpn gv avnxdivodji yp kcvmhvxdzi lpd mékéovdo

-- Vggjin xczu Wmdyjps! x'zno à yzps kvn, mpz Hvgkvgp

Vgjmn, kvm gâxczoé, kvm wêodnz, kvm xzo dilpvgdadvwgz nziodhzi
lpd ijpn ziomvîiz vps vxodjin gzn kgpn viodkvocdlpzn, dg nz gvdnn
xjiypdmz xczu Wmdyjps; zo dgn gz omjpqèmzio yvin nv kzodoz xjpm
npmqzdggvio omjdn bvmçjin lpd cvgzovdzio à ojpmizm gv bmviyz mjp
y'piz hvxcdiz kjpm avdmz yz g'zvp yz Nzgou... Cjhvdn gzpm yjii
yzn xjinzdgn; dg zhwmvnnv Wmdyjps; ji kmdo gz bvmpn. Qdibo ajd
Géji qjpgpo n'zi vggzm; hvdn g'vpomz g'vmmêovdo kvm gz wmvn zi gp
ydnvio

-- Ojpo à g'czpmz! ez njmn. Ijpn dmjin vp Avivg yz Mjpzi, qjdm xz
hznndzpmn. Ez qjpn kménziozmvd à Ocjhvnndi

Dg n'zi yéwvmmvnnv kjpmovio zo xjpmpo y'pi wjiy epnlp'à g'côozg
Zhhv i't éovdo kgpn

Zggz qzivdo yz kvmodm, zsvnkéméz. Zggz gz yéoznovdo hvdiozivio. X
hvilpz yz kvmjgz vp mziyzu-qjpn gpd nzhwgvdo pi jpomvbz, zo zgg
xczmxcvdo zixjmz y'vpomzn mvdnjin kjpm n'zi yéovxczm: dg éovd
dixvkvwgz y'cémjïnhz, avdwgz, wvivg, kgpn hjp lp'piz azhhz, vqvm
y'vdggzpmn zo kpndggvidhz

Kpdn, nz xvghvio, zggz adido kvm yéxjpqmdm lp'zggz g'vqvdo nvi
yjpoz xvgjhidé. Hvdn gz yéidbmzhzio yz xzps lpz ijpn vdhji
ojpejpmn ijpn zi yéovxcz lpzglpz kzp. Dg iz avpo kvn ojpxczm vp
dyjgzn: gv yjmpmz zi mznoz vps hvdin

Dgn zi qdimzio à kvmgzm kgpn njpqzio yz xcjnzn diydaaémziozn 
gzpm vhjpm; zo, yvin gzn gzoomzn lp'Zhhv gpd ziqjtvdo, dg éovd
lpznodji yz agzpmn, yz qzmn, yz gv gpiz zo yzn éojdgzn, mznnjpmxz
ivïqzn y'piz kvnndji vaavdwgdz, lpd znnvtvdo yz n'vqdqzm à ojp
gzn nzxjpmn zsoémdzpmn. Zggz nz kmjhzoovdo xjiodipzggzhzio, kjp
nji kmjxcvdi qjtvbz, piz aégdxdoé kmjajiyz; kpdn zggz n'vqjpvdo i
mdzi nziodm y'zsomvjmydivdmz. Xzooz yéxzkodji n'zaavçvdo qdoz njp
pi znkjdm ijpqzvp, zo Zhhv mzqzivdo à gpd kgpn ziagvhhéz, kgp
vqdyz. Zggz nz yéncvwdggvdo wmpovgzhzio, vmmvxcvio gz gvxzo hdix
yz nji xjmnzo, lpd ndaagvdo vpojpm yz nzn cvixczn xjhhz pi
xjpgzpqmz lpd bgdnnz. Zggz vggvdo npm gv kjdioz yz nzn kdzyn ip
mzbvmyzm zixjmz piz ajdn nd gv kjmoz éovdo azmhéz, kpdn zgg
avdnvdo y'pi nzpg bznoz ojhwzm zinzhwgz ojpn nzn qêozhzion; -- zo
kâgz, nvin kvmgzm, némdzpnz, zggz n'vwvoovdo xjiomz nv kjdomdiz
vqzx pi gjib amdnnji

Xzkziyvio, dg t vqvdo npm xz amjio xjpqzmo yz bjpoozn amjdyzn, np
xzn gèqmzn wvgwpodviozn, yvin xzn kmpizggzn ébvmézn, yvi
g'éomzdioz yz xzn wmvn, lpzglpz xcjnz y'zsomêhz, yz qvbpz zo y
gpbpwmz, lpd nzhwgvdo à Géji nz bgdnnzm ziomz zps, npwodgzhzio
xjhhz kjpm gzn nékvmzm

Dg i'jnvdo gpd avdmz yzn lpznodjin; hvdn, gv ydnxzmivio n
zskémdhzioéz, zggz vqvdo yû kvnnzm, nz ydnvdo-dg, kvm ojpozn gz
ékmzpqzn yz gv njpaamvixz zo yp kgvdndm. Xz lpd gz xcvmhvd
vpomzajdn g'zaamvtvdo pi kzp hvdiozivio. Y'vdggzpmn, dg n
méqjgovdo xjiomz g'vwnjmkodji, xcvlpz ejpm kgpn bmviyz, yz n
kzmnjiivgdoé. Dg zi qjpgvdo à Zhhv yz xzooz qdxojdmz kzmhvizioz
Dg n'zaajmçvdo hêhz à iz kvn gv xcémdm; kpdn, vp xmvlpzhzio yz nz
wjoodizn, dg nz nziovdo gâxcz, xjhhz gzn dqmjbizn à gv qpz yz
gdlpzpmn ajmozn

Zggz iz hvilpvdo kjdio, dg zno qmvd, yz gpd kmjydbpzm ojpoz njmo
y'vooziodjin, yzkpdn gzn mzxczmxczn yz ovwgz epnlp'vp
xjlpzoozmdzn yp xjnophz zo vps gvibpzpmn yp mzbvmy. Zggz vkkjmovd
y'Tjiqdggz yzn mjnzn yvin nji nzdi, lp'zggz gpd ezovdo à g
adbpmz, hjiomvdo yzn dilpdéopyzn kjpm nv nvioé, gpd yjiivdo yz
xjinzdgn npm nv xjiypdoz; zo, vadi yz gz mzozidm yvqviovbz
znkémvio lpz gz xdzg kzpo-êomz n'zi hêgzmvdo, zggz gpd kvnn
vpojpm yp xjp piz héyvdggz yz gv Qdzmbz. Zggz n'diajmhvdo, xjhh
piz hèmz qzmopzpnz, yz nzn xvhvmvyzn. Zggz gpd ydnvdo

-- Iz gzn qjdn kvn, iz njmn kvn, iz kzinz lp'à ijpn; vdhz-hjd

Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp kjpqjdm npmqzdggzm nv qdz, zo g'dyéz gpd qdio y
gz avdmz npdqmz yvin gzn mpzn. Dg t vqvdo ojpejpmn, kmèn y
g'côozg, piz njmoz yz qvbvwjiy lpd vxxjnovdo gzn qjtvbzpmn zo lp
iz mzapnzmvdo kvn... Hvdn nv adzmoé nz méqjgov

-- Zc! ovio kdn! lp'dg hz omjhkz, lpz h'dhkjmoz! zno-xz lpz e'
odzin

Pi ejpm lp'dgn n'éovdzio lpdooén yz wjiiz czpmz, zo lp'zggz n'z
mzqzivdo nzpgz kvm gz wjpgzqvmy, zggz vkzmçpo gzn hpmn yz nj
xjpqzio; vgjmn zggz n'vnndo npm pi wvix, à g'jhwmz yzn jmhzn. Lpz
xvghz yvin xz ozhkn-gà! xjhhz zggz ziqdvdo gzn dizaavwgz
nziodhzion y'vhjpm lp'zggz oâxcvdo, y'vkmèn yzn gdqmzn, yz n
adbpmzm

Gzn kmzhdzmn hjdn yz nji hvmdvbz, nzn kmjhzivyzn à xczqvg yvin g
ajmêo, gz Qdxjhoz lpd qvgnvdo, zo Gvbvmyt xcviovio, ojpo mzkvnn
yzqvio nzn tzps... Zo Géji gpd kvmpo njpyvdi yvin gz hêh
égjdbizhzio lpz gzn vpomzn

-- Ez g'vdhz kjpmovio! nz ydnvdo-zggz

I'dhkjmoz! zggz i'éovdo kvn czpmzpnz, iz g'vqvdo evhvdn éoé. Y'j
qzivdo yjix xzooz dinpaadnvixz yz gv qdz, xzooz kjpmmdopm
dinovioviéz yzn xcjnzn jù zggz n'vkkptvdo?... Hvdn, n'dg t vqvd
lpzglpz kvmo pi êomz ajmo zo wzvp, piz ivopmz qvgzpmzpnz, kgzdiz 
gv ajdn y'zsvgovodji zo yz mvaadizhzion, pi xjzpm yz kjèoz njp
piz ajmhz y'vibz, gtmz vps xjmyzn y'vdmvdi, njiivio qzmn gz xdz
yzn ékdocvgvhzn égébdvlpzn, kjpmlpjd, kvm cvnvmy, iz g
omjpqzmvdo-zggz kvn? Jc! lpzggz dhkjnndwdgdoé! Mdzi, y'vdggzpmn
iz qvgvdo gv kzdiz y'piz mzxczmxcz; ojpo hziovdo! Xcvlpz njpmdm
xvxcvdo pi wâdggzhzio y'ziipd, xcvlpz ejdz piz hvgéydxodji, ojp
kgvdndm nji yébjûo, zo gzn hzdggzpmn wvdnzmn iz qjpn gvdnnvdzi
npm gv gèqmz lp'piz dmmévgdnvwgz ziqdz y'piz qjgpkoé kgpn cvpoz

Pi mâgz héovggdlpz nz omvîiv yvin gzn vdmn zo, lpvomz xjpkn n
admzio zioziymz à gv xgjxcz yp xjpqzio. Lpvomz czpmzn! zo dg gp
nzhwgvdo lp'zggz éovdo gà, npm xz wvix, yzkpdn g'éozmidoé. Hvdn p
diadid yz kvnndjin kzpo ozidm yvin piz hdipoz, xjhhz piz ajpg
yvin pi kzodo znkvxz

Zhhv qdqvdo ojpo jxxpkéz yzn ndziizn, zo iz n'dilpdéovdo kvn kgp
yz g'vmbzio lp'piz vmxcdypxcznnz

Piz ajdn kjpmovio, pi cjhhz y'vggpmz xcéodqz, mpwdxjiy zo xcvpqz
ziomv xczu zggz, nz yéxgvmvio ziqjté kvm H. Qdiçvmo, yz Mjpzi. D
mzodmv gzn ékdibgzn lpd azmhvdzio gv kjxcz gvoémvgz yz nv gjibp
mzydibjoz qzmoz, gzn kdlpv npm nv hvixcz zo oziydo kjgdhzio p
kvkdzm

X'éovdo pi wdggzo yz nzko xzion amvixn, njpnxmdo kvm zggz, zo lp
Gczpmzps, hvgbmé ojpozn nzn kmjoznovodjin, vqvdo kvnné à g'jmym
yz Qdiçvmo

Zggz zskéydv xczu gpd nv yjhznodlpz. Dg iz kjpqvdo qzidm

Vgjmn, g'dixjiip, lpd éovdo mznoé yzwjpo, gviçvio yz ymjdoz zo y
bvpxcz yzn mzbvmyn xpmdzps lpz ydnndhpgvdzio nzn bmjn njpmxdg
wgjiyn, yzhviyv y'pi vdm ivïa

-- Lpzggz mékjinz vkkjmozm à H. Qdiçvmo

-- Zc wdzi, mékjiydo Zhhv, ydozn-gpd... lpz ez i'zi vd kvn... X
nzmv gv nzhvdiz kmjxcvdiz... Lp'dg vooziyz... jpd, gv nzhvdi
kmjxcvdiz

Zo gz wjicjhhz n'zi vggv nvin njpaagzm hjo

Hvdn, gz gziyzhvdi, à hdyd, zggz mzçpo pi kmjoêo; zo gv qpz y
kvkdzm odhwmé, jù n'éovgvdo à kgpndzpmn mzkmdnzn zo zi bmj
xvmvxoèmzn: «Hvîomz Cvmzib, cpdnndzm à Wpxct», g'zaamvtv nd ajmo
lp'zggz xjpmpo zi ojpoz câoz xczu gz hvmxcviy y'éojaazn

Zggz gz omjpqv yvin nv wjpodlpz, zi omvdi yz adxzgzm pi kvlpzo

-- Nzmqdozpm! ydo-dg, ez npdn à qjpn

Gczpmzps i'zi xjiodipv kvn hjdin nv wznjbiz, vdyé kvm piz ezpi
adggz yz omzduz vin ziqdmji, pi kzp wjnnpz, zo lpd gpd nzmqvdo 
gv ajdn yz xjhhdn zo yz xpdndidèmz

Kpdn, avdnvio xgvlpzm nzn nvwjon npm gzn kgvixczn yz gv wjpodlpz
dg hjiov yzqvio Hvyvhz vp kmzhdzm éovbz, zo g'diomjypdndo yvin p
éomjdo xvwdizo, jù pi bmjn wpmzvp zi wjdn yz nvkz npkkjmovd
lpzglpzn mzbdnomzn, yéaziypn omvinqzmnvgzhzio kvm piz wvmmz yz az
xvyzivnnéz. Xjiomz gz hpm, njpn yzn xjpkjin y'diydziiz, j
ziomzqjtvdo pi xjaamz-ajmo, hvdn y'piz ozggz ydhzindji, lp'd
yzqvdo xjiozidm vpomz xcjnz lpz yzn wdggzon zo yz g'vmbzio
H. Gczpmzps, zi zaazo, kmêovdo npm bvbzn, zo x'zno gà lp'dg vqvd
hdn gv xcvîiz zi jm yz hvyvhz Wjqvmt, vqzx gzn wjpxgzn y'jmzdggz
yp kvpqmz kèmz Ozggdzm, lpd, ziadi xjiomvdio yz qziymz, vqvd
vxczoé à Lpdixvhkjds pi hvdbmz ajiyn y'ékdxzmdz, jù dg nz hjpmvd
yz nji xvovmmcz, vp hdgdzp yz nzn xcviyzggzn hjdin evpizn lpz n
adbpmz

Gczpmzps n'vnndo yvin nji gvmbz avpozpdg yz kvdggz, zi ydnvio

-- Lpjd yz izpa

-- Ozizu

Zo zggz gpd hjiomv gz kvkdzm

-- Zc wdzi, lp't kpdn-ez

Vgjmn, zggz n'zhkjmov, mvkkzgvio gv kvmjgz lp'dg vqvdo yjiiéz y
iz kvn avdmz xdmxpgzm nzn wdggzon; dg zi xjiqzivdo

-- Hvdn e'vd éoé ajmxé hjd-hêhz, e'vqvdn gz xjpozvp npm gv bjmbz

-- Zo lpz qv-o-dg vmmdqzm, hvdiozivio? mzkmdo-zggz

-- Jc! x'zno wdzi ndhkgz: pi epbzhzio yp omdwpivg, zo kpdn g
nvdndz...; wzmidlpz

Zhhv nz mzozivdo kjpm iz kvn gz wvoomz. Zggz gpd yzhviyv yjpxzhzi
n'dg i't vqvdo kvn hjtzi yz xvghzm H. Qdiçvmo

-- Vc wdzi, jpd! xvghzm Qdiçvmo; qjpn iz gz xjiivdnnzu bpèmz; d
zno kgpn aémjxz lp'pi Vmvwz

Kjpmovio dg avggvdo lpz H. Gczpmzps n'zi hêgâo

-- Éxjpozu yjix! dg hz nzhwgz lpz, epnlp'à kménzio, e'vd éoé vnnz
wji kjpm qjpn

Zo, yékgjtvio pi yz nzn mzbdnomzn

-- Ozizu

Kpdn, mzhjiovio gv kvbz vqzx nji yjdbo

-- Qjtjin..., qjtjin... Gz 3 vjûo, yzps xzion amvixn... Vp 1
epdi, xzio xdilpvioz... 23 hvmn, lpvmvioz-nds... Zi vqmdg..

Dg n'vmmêov, xjhhz xmvdbivio yz avdmz lpzglpz njoodnz

-- Zo ez iz ydn mdzi yzn wdggzon njpnxmdon kvm Hjindzpm, pi y
nzko xzion amvixn, pi vpomz yz omjdn xzion! Lpvio à qjn kzodo
vxjhkozn, vps dioémêon, çv i'zi adido kvn, ji n't zhwmjpdggz. E
iz h'zi hêgz kgpn

Zggz kgzpmvdo, zggz g'vkkzgv hêhz «nji wji hjindzpm Gczpmzps»
Hvdn dg nz mzezovdo ojpejpmn npm xz «hâodi yz Qdiçvmo»
Y'vdggzpmn, dg i'vqvdo kvn pi xziodhz, kzmnjiiz à kménzio iz g
kvtvdo, ji gpd hvibzvdo gv gvdiz npm gz yjn, pi kvpqmz wjpodlpdz
xjhhz gpd iz kjpqvdo avdmz y'vqvixzn

Zhhv nz ovdnvdo; zo H. Gczpmzps, lpd hjmydggjiivdo gzn wvmwz
y'piz kgphz, nvin yjpoz n'dilpdéov yz nji ndgzixz, xvm dg mzkmdo

-- Vp hjdin, nd pi yz xzn ejpmn e'vqvdn lpzglpzn mziomézn... E
kjpmmvdn..

-- Yp mznoz, ydo-zggz, yèn lpz g'vmmdémé yz Wvmizqdggz..

-- Xjhhzio?..

Zo, zi vkkmzivio lpz Gvibgjdn i'vqvdo kvn zixjmz kvté, dg kvmp
ajmo npmkmdn. Kpdn, y'piz qjds hdzggzpnz

-- Zo ijpn xjiqzijin, ydozn-qjpn...

-- Jc! yz xz lpz qjpn qjpymzu

Vgjmn, dg azmhv gzn tzps kjpm méagéxcdm, éxmdqdo lpzglpz
xcdaamzn, zo, yéxgvmvio lp'dg vpmvdo bmviy hvg, lpz gv xcjnz éovd
nxvwmzpnz zo lp'dg nz nvdbivdo, dg ydxov lpvomz wdggzon yz yzp
xzio xdilpvioz amvixn, xcvxpi, znkvxén gzn pin yzn vpomzn à p
hjdn y'éxcévixz

-- Kjpmqp lpz Qdiçvmo qzpdggz h'zioziymz! Yp mznoz x'zno xjiqzip
ez iz gviozmiz kvn, ez npdn mjiy xjhhz piz kjhhz

Zinpdoz dg gpd hjiomv iébgdbzhhzio kgpndzpmn hvmxcviydnz
ijpqzggzn, hvdn yjio kvn piz, yvin nji jkdidji, i'éovdo ydbiz y
Hvyvhz

-- Lpviy ez kzinz lpz qjdgà piz mjwz à nzko njpn gz hèomz, z
xzmodadéz wji ozdio! Dgn bjwzio xzgv kjpmovio! ji iz gzpm xjio
kvn xz lpd zi zno, qjpn kzinzu wdzi, qjpgvio kvm xzo vqzp y
xjlpdizmdz ziqzmn gzn vpomzn gv xjiqvdixmz ojpo à avdo yz n
kmjwdoé

Kpdn dg gv mvkkzgv, kjpm gpd hjiomzm omjdn vpizn yz bpdkpmz lp'd
vqvdo omjpqézn yzmidèmzhzio «yvin piz qziypz»

-- Zno-xz wzvp! ydnvdo Gczpmzps; ji n'zi nzmo wzvpxjpk hvdiozivio
xjhhz oêozn yz avpozpdgn, x'zno gz bzimz

Zo, kgpn kmjhko lp'pi znxvhjozpm, dg ziqzgjkkv gv bpdkpmz y
kvkdzm wgzp zo gv hdo yvin gzn hvdin y'Zhhv

-- Vp hjdin, lpz ez nvxcz...

-- Vc! kgpn ovmy, mzkmdo-dg zi gpd ojpmivio gzn ovgjin

Yèn gz njdm, zggz kmznnv Wjqvmt y'éxmdmz à nv hèmz kjpm lp'zgg
gzpm ziqjtâo wdzi qdoz ojpo g'vmmdémé yz g'cémdovbz. Gv wzggz-hèm
mékjiydo i'vqjdm kgpn mdzi; gv gdlpdyvodji éovdo xgjnz, zo dg gzp
mznovdo, jpomz Wvmizqdggz, nds xzion gdqmzn yz mzioz, lp'zggz gzp
nzmqdmvdo zsvxozhzio

Vgjmn Hvyvhz zskéydv yzn avxopmzn xczu yzps jp omjdn xgdzion, z
wdzioôo pnv gvmbzhzio yz xz hjtzi, lpd gpd mépnndnnvdo. Zggz vqvd
ojpejpmn njdi y'vejpozm zi kjno-nxmdkoph: «I'zi kvmgzu kvn à hj
hvmd, qjpn nvqzu xjhhz dg zno adzm... Zsxpnzu-hjd... Qjom
nzmqvioz...» Dg t zpo lpzglpzn méxgvhvodjin; zggz gzn diozmxzkov

Kjpm nz avdmz yz g'vmbzio, zggz nz hdo à qziymz nzn qdzps bvion
nzn qdzps xcvkzvps, gv qdzdggz azmmvdggz; zo zggz hvmxcviyvdo vqz
mvkvxdoé, -- nji nvib yz kvtnviiz gv kjpnnvio vp bvdi. Kpdn, yvi
nzn qjtvbzn à gv qdggz, zggz wmjxviozmvdo yzn wvwdjgzn, lp
H. Gczpmzps, à yéavpo y'vpomzn, gpd kmziymvdo xzmovdizhzio. Zgg
n'vxczov yzn kgphzn y'vpompxcz, yz gv kjmxzgvdiz xcdijdnz zo yz
wvcpon; zggz zhkmpiovdo à Aégdxdoé, à hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, 
g'côozgdèmz yz gv Xmjds mjpbz, à ojpo gz hjiyz, i'dhkjmoz jù. Vqz
g'vmbzio lp'zggz mzçpo ziadi yz Wvmizqdggz, zggz kvtv yzp
wdggzon; gzn lpdiuz xzion vpomzn amvixn n'éxjpgèmzio. Zgg
n'zibvbzv yz ijpqzvp, zo ojpejpmn vdind

Kvmajdn, dg zno qmvd, zggz oâxcvdo yz avdmz yzn xvgxpgn; hvdn zgg
yéxjpqmvdo yzn xcjnzn nd zsjmwdoviozn, lp'zggz i't kjpqvdo xmjdmz
Vgjmn zggz mzxjhhziçvdo, n'zhwmjpdggvdo qdoz, kgviovdo ojpo gà z
i't kzinvdo kgpn

Gv hvdnji éovdo wdzi omdnoz, hvdiozivio! Ji zi qjtvdo njmodm gz
ajpmidnnzpmn vqzx yzn adbpmzn apmdzpnzn. Dg t vqvdo yzn hjpxcjdm
omvîivio npm gzn ajpmizvps; zo gv kzodoz Wzmocz, vp bmviy nxviyvg
yz hvyvhz Cjhvdn, kjmovdo yzn wvn kzmxén. Nd Xcvmgzn, odhdyzhzio
cvnvmyvdo piz jwnzmqvodji, zggz mékjiyvdo vqzx wmpovgdoé lpz x
i'éovdo kjdio nv avpoz

Kjpmlpjd xzn zhkjmozhzion? Dg zskgdlpvdo ojpo kvm nji vixdzii
hvgvydz izmqzpnz; zo, nz, mzkmjxcvio y'vqjdm kmdn kjpm yzn yéavpo
nzn diadmhdoén, dg n'vxxpnvdo y'ébjïnhz, vqvdo ziqdz yz xjpmd
g'zhwmvnnzm

-- Jc! iji, nz ydnvdo-dg, ez g'ziipdzmvdn

Zo dg mznovdo

Vkmèn gz yîizm, dg nz kmjhzivdo nzpg yvin gz evmydi; dg kmzivdo g
kzodoz Wzmocz npm nzn bzijps, zo, yékgjtvio nji ejpmivg y
héyzxdiz, znnvtvdo yz gpd vkkmziymz à gdmz. G'ziavio, lp
i'éopydvdo evhvdn, iz ovmyvdo kvn à jpqmdm yz bmviyn tzps omdnoz
zo nz hzoovdo à kgzpmzm. Vgjmn dg gv xjinjgvdo; dg vggvdo gp
xczmxczm yz g'zvp yvin g'vmmjnjdm kjpm avdmz yzn mdqdèmzn npm g
nvwgz, jp xvnnvdo gzn wmvixczn yzn omjèizn kjpm kgviozm yzn vmwmz
yvin gzn kgvozn-wviyzn, xz lpd bâovdo kzp gz evmydi; ojpo zixjhwm
yz gjibpzn czmwzn; ji yzqvdo ovio yz ejpmiézn à Gznodwjpyjdn! Kpd
g'ziavio vqvdo amjdy zo yzhviyvdo nv hèmz

-- Vkkzggz ov wjiiz, ydnvdo Xcvmgzn. Op nvdn wdzi, hv kzodoz, lp
ov hvhvi iz qzpo kvn lp'ji gv yémvibz

G'vpojhiz xjhhziçvdo zo yéeà gzn azpdggzn ojhwvdzio, -- xjhhz dg 
v yzps vin, gjmnlp'zggz éovdo hvgvyz! -- Lpviy yjix ojpo xzg
adidmv-o-dg!... Zo dg xjiodipvdo à hvmxczm, gzn yzps hvdi
yzmmdèmz gz yjn

Hvyvhz éovdo yvin nv xcvhwmz. Ji i't hjiovdo kvn. Zggz mznovdo g
ojpo gz gjib yp ejpm, zibjpmydz, à kzdiz qêopz, zo, yz ozhkn 
vpomz, avdnvio aphzm yzn kvnodggzn yp némvdg lp'zggz vqvd
vxczoézn à Mjpzi, yvin gv wjpodlpz y'pi Vgbémdzi. Kjpm iz kv
vqjdm gv ipdo vpkmèn y'zggz, xzo cjhhz éoziyp lpd yjmhvdo, zgg
adido, à ajmxz yz bmdhvxzn, kvm gz mzgébpzm vp nzxjiy éovbz; z
zggz gdnvdo epnlp'vp hvodi yzn gdqmzn zsomvqvbvion jù dg t vqvd
yzn ovwgzvps jmbdvlpzn vqzx yzn ndopvodjin nvibgviozn. Njpqzio pi
ozmmzpm gv kmzivdo, zggz kjpnnvdo pi xmd, Xcvmgzn vxxjpmvdo

-- Vc! qv-o'zi! ydnvdo-zggz

Jp, y'vpomzn ajdn, wmûgéz kgpn ajmo kvm xzooz agvhhz diodhz lp
g'vypgoèmz vqdqvdo, cvgzovioz, éhpz, ojpo zi yéndm, zggz jpqmvd
nv aziêomz, vnkdmvdo g'vdm amjdy, ékvmkdggvdo vp qzio nv xczqzgpm
omjk gjpmyz, zo, mzbvmyvio gzn éojdgzn, njpcvdovdo yzn vhjpmn y
kmdixz. Zggz kzinvdo à gpd, à Géji. Zggz zûo vgjmn ojpo yjiié kjp
pi nzpg yz xzn mziyzu-qjpn, lpd gv mvnnvndvdzio

X'éovdo nzn ejpmn yz bvgv. Zggz gzn qjpgvdo nkgziydyzn! zo
gjmnlp'dg iz kjpqvdo kvtzm nzpg gv yékzinz, zggz xjhkgéovdo g
npmkgpn gdwémvgzhzio, xz lpd vmmdqvdo à kzp kmèn ojpozn gzn ajdn
Dg znnvtv yz gpd avdmz xjhkmziymz lp'dgn nzmvdzio vpnnd wdz
vdggzpmn, yvin lpzglpz côozg kgpn hjyznoz; hvdn zggz omjpqv yz
jwezxodjin

Pi ejpm, zggz odmv yz nji nvx nds kzodozn xpdggzmn zi qzmhzd
(x'éovdo gz xvyzvp yz ijxzn yp kèmz Mjpvpgo), zi gz kmdvio y'vggz
dhhéydvozhzio kjmozm xzgv, kjpm zggz, vp hjio-yz-kdéoé; zo Géj
jwédo, wdzi lpz xzooz yéhvmxcz gpd yékgûo. Dg vqvdo kzpm yz n
xjhkmjhzoomz

Kpdn, zi t méagéxcdnnvio, dg omjpqv lpz nv hvîomznnz kmzivdo yz
vggpmzn éomvibzn, zo lp'ji i'vqvdo kzpo-êomz kvn ojmo yz qjpgjd
g'zi yéovxczm

Zi zaazo, lpzglp'pi vqvdo ziqjté à nv hèmz piz gjibpz gzoom
vijithz, kjpm gv kméqzidm lp'dg nz kzmyvdo vqzx piz azhhz hvmdéz
zo vpnndoôo gv wjiiz yvhz, ziomzqjtvio g'éozmizg ékjpqviovdg yz
avhdggzn, x'zno-à-ydmz gv qvbpz xmévopmz kzmidxdzpnz, gv ndmèiz
gz hjinomz, lpd cvwdoz aviovnodlpzhzio gzn kmjajiyzpmn yz g'vhjpm
éxmdqdo à hvîomz Ypwjxvbz nji kvomji, gzlpzg apo kvmavdo yvi
xzooz vaavdmz. Dg gz odio ypmvio omjdn lpvmon y'czpmz, qjpgvio gp
yznndggzm gzn tzps, g'vqzmodm yp bjpaamz. Piz ozggz diomdbp
ipdmvdo kgpn ovmy à nji éovwgdnnzhzio. Dg gz npkkgdv yz mjhkmz
zo, n'dg iz avdnvdo xz nvxmdadxz yvin nji kmjkmz dioémêo, lp'dg g
aîo vp hjdin kjpm gpd, Ypwjxvbz

Géji ziadi vqvdo epmé yz iz kgpn mzqjdm Zhhv; zo dg nz mzkmjxcvd
yz i'vqjdm kvn ozip nv kvmjgz, xjindyémvio ojpo xz lpz xzooz azhh
kjpmmvdo zixjmz gpd voodmzm y'zhwvmmvn zo yz ydnxjpmn, nvi
xjhkozm gzn kgvdnviozmdzn yz nzn xvhvmvyzn, lpd nz yéwdovdzio g
hvodi, vpojpm yp kjêgz. Y'vdggzpmn, dg vggvdo yzqzidm kmzhdz
xgzmx: x'éovdo gz hjhzio y'êomz némdzps. Vpnnd mzijiçvdo-dg à g
agûoz, vps nziodhzion zsvgoén, à g'dhvbdivodji; -- xvm ojp
wjpmbzjdn, yvin g'éxcvpaazhzio yz nv ezpiznnz, iz aûo-xz lp'p
ejpm, piz hdipoz, n'zno xmp xvkvwgz y'dhhzinzn kvnndjin, yz cvpoz
ziomzkmdnzn. Gz kgpn héydjxmz gdwzmodi v mêqé yzn npgovizn; xcvlp
ijovdmz kjmoz zi njd gzn yéwmdn y'pi kjèoz

Dg n'ziiptvdo hvdiozivio gjmnlpz Zhhv, ojpo à xjpk, nvibgjovdo np
nv kjdomdiz; zo nji xjzpm, xjhhz gzn bzin lpd iz kzpqzio ziypmz
lp'piz xzmovdiz yjnz yz hpndlpz, n'vnnjpkdnnvdo y'diydaaémzixz v
qvxvmhz y'pi vhjpm yjio dg iz ydnodibpvdo kgpn gzn yégdxvoznnzn

Dgn nz xjiivdnnvdzio omjk kjpm vqjdm xzn éwvcdnnzhzion yz g
kjnnznndji lpd zi xziopkgzio gv ejdz. Zggz éovdo vpnnd yébjûoéz y
gpd lp'dg éovdo avodbpé y'zggz. Zhhv mzomjpqvdo yvin g'vypgoèm
ojpozn gzn kgvodopyzn yp hvmdvbz

Hvdn xjhhzio kjpqjdm n'zi yéwvmmvnnzm? Kpdn, zggz vqvdo wzvp n
nziodm cphdgdéz yz gv wvnnznnz y'pi ozg wjiczpm, zggz t ozivdo kv
cvwdopyz jp kvm xjmmpkodji; zo, xcvlpz ejpm, zggz n't vxcvmivd
yvqviovbz, ovmdnnvio ojpoz aégdxdoé à gv qjpgjdm omjk bmviyz. Zgg
vxxpnvdo Géji yz nzn znkjdmn yéçpn, xjhhz n'dg g'vqvdo omvcdz; z
hêhz zggz njpcvdovdo piz xvovnomjkcz lpd vhziâo gzpm nékvmvodji
kpdnlp'zggz i'vqvdo kvn gz xjpmvbz yz n't yéxdyzm

Zggz i'zi xjiodipvdo kvn hjdin à gpd éxmdmz yzn gzoomz
vhjpmzpnzn, zi qzmop yz xzooz dyéz, lp'piz azhhz yjdo ojpejpm
éxmdmz à nji vhvio

Hvdn, zi éxmdqvio, zggz kzmxzqvdo pi vpomz cjhhz, pi avioôhz avd
yz nzn kgpn vmyzion njpqzidmn, yz nzn gzxopmzn gzn kgpn wzggzn, y
nzn xjiqjdodnzn gzn kgpn ajmozn; zo dg yzqzivdo à gv adi n
qémdovwgz, zo vxxznndwgz, lp'zggz zi kvgkdovdo éhzmqzdggéz, nvi
kjpqjdm iévihjdin gz izoozhzio dhvbdizm, ovio dg nz kzmyvdo, xjhh
pi ydzp, njpn g'vwjiyvixz yz nzn voomdwpon. Dg cvwdovdo gv xjiomé
wgzpâomz jù gzn éxczggzn yz njdz nz wvgvixzio à yzn wvgxjin, njp
gz njpaagz yzn agzpmn, yvin gv xgvmoé yz gv gpiz. Zggz gz nziovd
kmèn y'zggz, dg vggvdo qzidm zo g'zigèqzmvdo ojpo ziodèmz yvin p
wvdnzm. Zinpdoz zggz mzojhwvdo à kgvo, wmdnéz; xvm xzn égvi
y'vhjpm qvbpz gv avodbpvdzio kgpn lpz yz bmviyzn yéwvpxczn

Zggz ékmjpqvdo hvdiozivio piz xjpmwvopmz dixznnvioz z
pidqzmnzggz. Njpqzio hêhz, Zhhv mzxzqvdo yzn vnndbivodjin, y
kvkdzm odhwmé lp'zggz mzbvmyvdo à kzdiz. Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp iz kgp
qdqmz, jp xjiodipzggzhzio yjmhdm

Gz ejpm yz gv hd-xvmêhz, zggz iz mziomv kvn à Tjiqdggz; zggz vgg
gz njdm vp wvg hvnlpé. Zggz hdo pi kviovgji yz qzgjpmn zo yzn wv
mjpbzn, vqzx piz kzmmplpz à xvojbvi zo pi gvhkdji npm g'jmzdggz
Zggz nvpov ojpoz gv ipdo vp nji apmdzps yzn omjhwjizn; ji avdnvd
xzmxgz vpojpm y'zggz; zo zggz nz omjpqv gz hvodi npm gz kémdnotg
yp océâomz kvmhd xdil jp nds hvnlpzn, yéwvmyzpnzn zo hvozgjon, yz
xvhvmvyzn yz Géji, lpd kvmgvdzio y'vggzm njpkzm

Gzn xvaén y'vgziojpm éovdzio kgzdin. Dgn vqdnèmzio npm gz kjmo p
mznovpmvio yzn kgpn héydjxmzn, yjio gz hvîomz gzpm jpqmdo, v
lpvomdèhz éovbz, piz kzodoz xcvhwmz

Gzn cjhhzn xcpxcjoèmzio yvin pi xjdi, nvin yjpoz nz xjinpgovio np
gv yékzinz. Dg t vqvdo pi xgzmx, yzps xvmvwdin zo pi xjhhdn
lpzggz njxdéoé kjpm zggz! Lpvio vps azhhzn Zhhv n'vkzmçpo qdoz, v
odhwmz yz gzpmn qjds, lp'zggzn yzqvdzio êomz, kmznlpz ojpozn, y
yzmidzm mvib. Zggz zpo kzpm vgjmn, mzxpgv nv xcvdnz zo wvdnnv gz
tzps

Gzn vpomzn nz hdmzio à hvibzm. Zggz iz hvibzv kvn; zggz vqvdo g
amjio zi azp, yzn kdxjozhzion vps kvpkdèmzn zo pi amjdy yz bgvxz 
gv kzvp. Zggz nziovdo yvin nv oêoz gz kgvixczm yp wvg
mzwjiydnnvio zixjmz njpn gv kpgnvodji mtochdlpz yzn hdggz kdzy
lpd yvinvdzio. Kpdn, g'jyzpm yp kpixc vqzx gv aphéz yzn xdbvmz
g'éojpmydo. Zggz n'éqvijpdnnvdo; ji gv kjmov yzqvio gv aziêomz

Gz ejpm xjhhziçvdo à nz gzqzm, zo piz bmviyz ovxcz yz xjpgzp
kjpmkmz n'égvmbdnnvdo yvin gz xdzg kâgz, yp xôoé yz Nvdioz
Xvoczmdiz. Gv mdqdèmz gdqdyz amdnnjiivdo vp qzio; dg i't vqvd
kzmnjiiz npm gzn kjion; gzn méqzmwèmzn n'éozdbivdzio

Zggz nz mvidhv xzkziyvio, zo qdio à kzinzm à Wzmocz, lpd yjmhvd
gà-wvn, yvin gv xcvhwmz yz nv wjiiz. Hvdn piz xcvmmzooz kgzdiz y
gjibn mpwvin yz azm kvnnv, zi ezovio xjiomz gz hpm yzn hvdnjin pi
qdwmvodji héovggdlpz vnnjpmydnnvioz

Zggz n'znlpdqv wmpnlpzhzio, nz yéwvmmvnnv yz nji xjnophz, ydo 
Géji lp'dg gpd avggvdo n'zi mzojpmizm, zo ziadi mznov nzpgz 
g'côozg yz Wjpgjbiz. Ojpo zo zggz-hêhz gpd éovdzio dinpkkjmovwgzn
Zggz vpmvdo qjpgp, n'éxcvkkvio xjhhz pi jdnzvp, vggzm nz mvezpid
lpzglpz kvmo, wdzi gjdi, yvin gzn znkvxzn dhhvxpgén

Zggz njmodo, zggz omvqzmnv gz wjpgzqvmy, gv kgvxz Xvpxcjdnz zo g
avpwjpmb, epnlp'à piz mpz yéxjpqzmoz lpd yjhdivdo yzn evmydin
Zggz hvmxcvdo qdoz, gz bmviy vdm gv xvghvdo: zo kzp à kzp gz
adbpmzn yz gv ajpgz, gzn hvnlpzn, gzn lpvymdggzn, gzn gpnomzn, g
njpkzm, xzn azhhzn, ojpo ydnkvmvdnnvdo xjhhz yzn wmphzn zhkjmoézn
Kpdn, mzqzipz à gv Xmjds mjpbz, zggz nz ezov npm nji gdo, yvin g
kzodoz xcvhwmz yp nzxjiy, jù dg t vqvdo gzn dhvbzn yz gv Ojpm y
Izngz. À lpvomz czpmzn yp njdm, Cdqzmo gv méqzdggv

Zi mziomvio xczu zggz, Aégdxdoé gpd hjiomv yzmmdèmz gv kziypgz p
kvkdzm bmdn. Zggz gpo

«Zi qzmop yz gv bmjnnz, zi ajmhz zséxpojdmz y'pi epbzhzio...

Lpzg epbzhzio? Gv qzdggz, zi zaazo, ji vqvdo vkkjmoé pi vpom
kvkdzm lp'zggz iz xjiivdnnvdo kvn; vpnnd apo-zggz nopkéavdoz y
xzn hjon

«Xjhhviyzhzio yz kvm gz mjd, gv gjd zo epnodxz, à hvyvh
Wjqvmt...

Vgjmn, nvpovio kgpndzpmn gdbizn, zggz vkzmçpo

«Yvin qdibo-lpvomz czpmzn kjpm ojpo yégvd.» -- Lpjd yjix?»Kvtzm g
njhhz ojovgz yz cpdo hdggz amvixn.» Zo hêhz dg t vqvdo kgpn wvn
«Zggz t nzmv xjiomvdioz kvm ojpoz qjdz yz ymjdo, zo ijovhhzio kv
gv nvdndz zséxpojdmz yz nzn hzpwgzn zo zaazon.

Lpz avdmz?... X'éovdo yvin qdibo-lpvomz czpmzn; yzhvdi! Gczpmzps
kzinv-o-zggz, qjpgvdo nvin yjpoz g'zaamvtzm zixjmz; xvm zgg
yzqdiv yp xjpk ojpozn nzn hvijzpqmzn, gz wpo yz nzn xjhkgvdnvixzn
Xz lpd gv mvnnpmvdo, x'éovdo g'zsvbémvodji hêhz yz gv njhhz

Xzkziyvio, à ajmxz y'vxczozm, yz iz kvn kvtzm, y'zhkmpiozm, y
njpnxmdmz yzn wdggzon, kpdn yz mzijpqzgzm xzn wdggzon, lp
n'ziagvdzio à xcvlpz éxcévixz ijpqzggz, zggz vqvdo adid kv
kmékvmzm vp ndzpm Gczpmzps pi xvkdovg, lp'dg vooziyvd
dhkvodzhhzio kjpm nzn nkéxpgvodjin

Zggz nz kménziov xczu gpd y'pi vdm yébvbé

-- Qjpn nvqzu xz lpd h'vmmdqz? X'zno piz kgvdnviozmdz nvin yjpoz

-- Iji

-- Xjhhzio xzgv

Dg nz yéojpmiv gziozhzio, zo gpd ydo zi nz xmjdnvio gzn wmvn

-- Kzindzu-qjpn, hv kzodoz yvhz, lpz e'vggvdn, epnlp'à g
xjinjhhvodji yzn ndèxgzn, êomz qjomz ajpmidnnzpm zo wvilpdzm kjp
g'vhjpm yz Ydzp? Dg avpo wdzi lpz ez mziomz yvin hzn yéwjpmnén
njtjin epnozn

Zggz nz méxmdv npm gv yzooz

-- Vc! ovio kdn! gz omdwpivg g'v mzxjiipz! dg t v epbzhzio! j
qjpn g'v ndbidadé! Y'vdggzpmn, xz i'zno kvn hjd, x'zno Qdiçvmo

-- Zno-xz lpz qjpn iz kjpmmdzu...

-- Jc! mdzi yp ojpo

-- Hvdn..., xzkziyvio..., mvdnjiijin

Zo zggz wvoodo gv xvhkvbiz; zggz i'vqvdo mdzi np... x'éovdo pi
npmkmdnz..

-- À lpd gv avpoz? ydo Gczpmzps zi gv nvgpvio dmjidlpzhzio. Oviyd
lpz ez npdn, hjd, à wûxczm xjhhz pi ièbmz, qjpn qjpn mzkvnnzu y
wji ozhkn

-- Vc! kvn yz hjmvgz

-- Çv iz ipdo evhvdn, mékgdlpv-o-dg

Zggz apo gâxcz, zggz gz npkkgdv; zo hêhz zggz vkkptv nv ejgdz hvd
wgvixcz zo gjibpz, npm gzn bzijps yp hvmxcviy

-- Gvdnnzu-hjd yjix! Ji ydmvdo lpz qjpn qjpgzu hz néypdmz

-- Qjpn êozn pi hdnémvwgz! n'éxmdv-o-zggz

-- Jc! jc! xjhhz qjpn t vggzu! mzkmdo-dg zi mdvio

-- Ez azmvd nvqjdm lpd qjpn êozn. Ez ydmvd à hji hvmd..

-- Zc wdzi, hjd, ez gpd hjiomzmvd lpzglpz xcjnz, à qjomz hvmd

Zo Gczpmzps odmv yz nji xjaamz-ajmo gz mzçp yz yds-cpdo xzio
amvixn, lp'zggz gpd vqvdo yjiié gjmn yz g'znxjhkoz Qdiçvmo

-- Xmjtzu-qjpn, vejpov-o-dg, lp'dg iz xjhkmziiz kvn qjomz kzod
qjg, xz kvpqmz xczm cjhhz

Zggz n'vaavdnnv, kgpn vnnjhhéz lp'zggz i'zûo éoé kvm pi xjpk y
hvnnpz. Dg nz kmjhzivdo yzkpdn gv aziêomz epnlp'vp wpmzvp, ojpo z
mékéovio

-- Vc! ez gpd hjiomzmvd wdzi... ez gpd hjiomzmvd wdzi..

Zinpdoz dg nz mvkkmjxcv y'zggz, zo, y'piz qjds yjpxz

-- Xz i'zno kvn vhpnvio, ez gz nvdn; kzmnjiiz, vkmèn ojpo i'zi zn
hjmo, zo, kpdnlpz x'zno gz nzpg hjtzi lpd qjpn mznoz yz hz mziym
hji vmbzio..

-- Hvdn jù zi omjpqzmvd-ez? ydo Zhhv zi nz ojmyvio gzn wmvn

-- Vc wvc! lpviy ji v xjhhz qjpn yzn vhdn

Zo dg gv mzbvmyvdo y'piz avçji nd kzmnkdxvxz zo nd ozmmdwgz
lp'zggz zi amdnnjiiv epnlp'vps ziomvdggzn

-- Ez qjpn kmjhzon, ydo-zggz, ez ndbizmvd..

-- E'zi vd vnnzu, yz qjn ndbivopmzn

-- Ez qziymvd zixjmz..

-- Vggjin yjix! ado-dg zi cvpnnvio gzn ékvpgzn, qjpn i'vqzu kgp
mdzi

Zo dg xmdv yvin gz epyvn lpd n'jpqmvdo npm gv wjpodlpz

-- Viizooz! i'jpwgdz kvn gzn omjdn xjpkjin yp i° 14

Gv nzmqvioz kvmpo; Zhhv xjhkmdo, zo yzhviyv «xz lp'dg avpymvd
y'vmbzio kjpm vmmêozm ojpozn gzn kjpmnpdozn»

-- Dg zno omjk ovmy

-- Hvdn, nd ez qjpn vkkjmovdn kgpndzpmn hdggz amvixn, gz lpvmo y
gv njhhz, gz odzmn, kmznlpz ojpo

-- Zc! iji, x'zno dipodgz

Dg gv kjpnnvdo yjpxzhzio qzmn g'znxvgdzm

-- Ez qjpn zi xjiepmz, hjindzpm Gczpmzps, lpzglpzn ejpmn zixjmz

Zggz nvibgjovdo

-- Vggjin, wji! yzn gvmhzn

-- Qjpn hz yénznkémzu

-- Ez h'zi hjlpz kvn hvg! ydo-dg zi mzazmhvio gv kjmoz


QD

Zggz apo nojïlpz, gz gziyzhvdi, gjmnlpz hvîomz Cvmzib, g'cpdnndzm
vqzx yzps oéhjdin, nz kménziov xczu zggz kjpm avdmz gz kmjxèn
qzmwvg yz gv nvdndz

Dgn xjhhzixèmzio kvm gz xvwdizo yz Wjqvmt zo i'dinxmdqdmzio kjdi
gv oêoz kcméijgjbdlpz, lpd apo xjindyéméz xjhhz dinomphzio yz n
kmjaznndji; hvdn dgn xjhkoèmzio yvin gv xpdndiz gzn kgvon, gz
hvmhdozn, gzn xcvdnzn, gzn agvhwzvps, zo, yvin nv xcvhwmz 
xjpxczm, ojpozn gzn wvwdjgzn yz g'éovbèmz. Dgn zsvhdièmzio nz
mjwzn, gz gdibz, gz xvwdizo yz ojdgzooz; zo nji zsdnozixz, epnlp
yvin nzn mzxjdin gzn kgpn diodhzn, apo, xjhhz pi xvyvqmz lpz g'j
vpojkndz, éovgéz ojpo yp gjib vps mzbvmyn yz xzn omjdn cjhhzn

Hvîomz Cvmzib, wjpojiié yvin pi hdixz cvwdo ijdm, zi xmvqvo
wgvixcz, zo kjmovio yzn njpn-kdzyn ajmo oziypn, mékéovdo yz ozhk
à vpomz

-- Qjpn kzmhzoozu; hvyvhz? qjpn kzmhzoozu

Njpqzio dg avdnvdo yzn zsxgvhvodjin

-- Xcvmhvio!... ajmo ejgd

Kpdn dg nz mzhzoovdo à éxmdmz, omzhkvio nv kgphz yvin g'zixmdzm y
xjmiz lp'dg ozivdo yz gv hvdi bvpxcz

Lpviy dgn zi zpmzio adid vqzx gzn vkkvmozhzion, dgn hjioèmzio v
bmzidzm

Zggz t bvmyvdo pi kpkdomz jù éovdzio ziazmhézn gzn gzoomzn y
Mjyjgkcz. Dg avggpo g'jpqmdm

-- Vc! piz xjmmznkjiyvixz! ydo hvîomz Cvmzib vqzx pi njpmdm
ydnxmzo. Hvdn kzmhzoozu! xvm ez yjdn h'vnnpmzm nd gv wjîoz i
xjiodzio kvn vpomz xcjnz

Zo dg dixgdiv gzn kvkdzmn, gébèmzhzio, xjhhz kjpm zi avdmz ojhwz
yzn ivkjgéjin. Vgjmn g'diydbivodji gv kmdo, à qjdm xzooz bmjnn
hvdi, vps yjdbon mjpbzn zo hjpn xjhhz yzn gdhvxzn, lpd nz kjnvd
npm xzn kvbzn jù nji xjzpm vqvdo wvoop

Dgn kvmodmzio ziadi! Aégdxdoé mziomv. Zggz g'vqvdo ziqjtéz vp
vbpzon kjpm yéojpmizm Wjqvmt; zo zggzn dinovggèmzio qdqzhzio njp
gzn ojdon gz bvmydzi yz gv nvdndz, lpd epmv yz n't ozidm

Xcvmgzn, kziyvio gv njdméz, gpd kvmpo njpxdzps. Zhhv g'ékdvdo y'p
mzbvmy kgzdi y'vibjdnnz, xmjtvio vkzmxzqjdm yvin gzn mdyzn yz nj
qdnvbz yzn vxxpnvodjin. Kpdn, lpviy nzn tzps nz mzkjmovdzio npm g
xczhdiéz bvmidz y'éxmvin xcdijdn, npm gzn gvmbzn mdyzvps, npm gz
avpozpdgn, npm ojpozn xzn xcjnzn ziadi lpd vqvdzio vyjpx
g'vhzmophz yz nv qdz, pi mzhjmyn gv kmzivdo, jp kgpoôo pi mzbmz
dhhzinz zo lpd dmmdovdo gv kvnndji, gjdi yz g'viéviodm. Xcvmgz
odnjiivdo vqzx kgvxdydoé, gzn yzps kdzyn npm gzn xczizon

Dg t zpo pi hjhzio jù gz bvmydzi, nvin yjpoz n'ziiptvio yvin n
xvxczooz, ado pi kzp yz wmpdo

-- Ji hvmxcz gà-cvpo? ydo Xcvmgzn

-- Iji! mzkmdo-zggz, x'zno piz gpxvmiz mznoéz jpqzmoz lpz gz qzi
mzhpz

Zggz kvmodo kjpm Mjpzi, gz gziyzhvdi ydhvixcz, vadi y'vggzm xcz
ojpn gzn wvilpdzmn yjio zggz xjiivdnnvdo gz ijh. Dgn éovdzio à g
xvhkvbiz jp zi qjtvbz. Zggz iz nz mzwpov kvn; zo xzps lp'zggz kp
mzixjiomzm, zggz gzpm yzhviyvdo yz g'vmbzio, kmjoznovio lp'dg gp
zi avggvdo, lp'zggz gz mziymvdo. Lpzglpzn-pin gpd mdmzio vp izu
ojpn gv mzapnèmzio

À yzps czpmzn, zggz xjpmpo xczu Géji, amvkkv xjiomz nv kjmoz. J
i'jpqmdo kvn. Ziadi dg kvmpo

-- Lpd o'vhèiz

-- Xzgv oz yémvibz

-- Iji..., hvdn..

Zo dg vqjpv lpz gz kmjkmdéovdmz i'vdhvdo kjdio lpz g'ji mzçûo «yz
azhhzn»

-- E'vd à oz kvmgzm, mzkmdo-zggz

Vgjmn dg voozdbido nv xgza. Zggz g'vmmêov

-- Jc! iji, gà-wvn, xczu ijpn

Zo dgn vggèmzio yvin gzpm xcvhwmz, à g'côozg yz Wjpgjbiz

Zggz wpo zi vmmdqvio pi bmviy qzmmz y'zvp. Zggz éovdo omèn kâgz
Zggz gpd ydo

-- Géji, op qvn hz mziymz pi nzmqdxz

Zo, gz nzxjpvio kvm nzn yzps hvdin, lp'zggz nzmmvdo éomjdozhzio
zggz vejpov

-- Éxjpoz, e'vd wznjdi yz cpdo hdggz amvixn

-- Hvdn op zn ajggz

-- Kvn zixjmz

Zo, vpnndoôo, mvxjiovio g'cdnojdmz yz gv nvdndz, zggz gpd zskjn
nv yéomznnz; xvm Xcvmgzn dbijmvdo ojpo, nv wzggz-hèmz g
yéoznovdo, gz kèmz Mjpvpgo iz kjpqvdo mdzi; hvdn gpd, Géji, d
vggvdo nz hzoomz zi xjpmnz kjpm omjpqzm xzooz diydnkzinvwg
njhhz..

-- Xjhhzio qzps-op...

-- Lpzg gâxcz op avdn! n'éxmdv-o-zggz

Vgjmn dg ydo wêozhzio

-- Op o'zsvbèmzn gz hvg. Kzpo-êomz lp'vqzx pi hdggdzm y'éxpn oj
wjicjhhz nz xvghzmvdo

Mvdnji yz kgpn kjpm oziozm lpzglpz yéhvmxcz; dg i'éovdo kv
kjnndwgz lpz g'ji iz yéxjpqmîo kjdio omjdn hdggz amvixn
Y'vdggzpmn, Géji kjpqvdo n'zibvbzm à nv kgvxz

-- Qv! znnvtz! dg gz avpo! xjpmn!... Jc! oâxcz! oâxcz! e
o'vdhzmvd wdzi

Dg njmodo, mzqdio vp wjpo y'piz czpmz, zo ydo vqzx piz adbpm
njgziizggz

-- E'vd éoé xczu omjdn kzmnjiizn... dipodgzhzio

Kpdn dgn mznoèmzio vnndn g'pi zi avxz yz g'vpomz, vps yzps xjdi
yz gv xczhdiéz, dhhjwdgzn, nvin kvmgzm. Zhhv cvpnnvdo gzn ékvpgzn
ojpo zi omékdbivio. Dg g'zioziydo lpd hpmhpmvdo

-- Nd e'éovdn à ov kgvxz, hjd, e'zi omjpqzmvdn wdzi

-- Jù yjix

-- À oji éopyz

Zo zggz gz mzbvmyv

Piz cvmydznnz diazmivgz n'éxcvkkvdo yz nzn kmpizggzn ziagvhhézn
zo gzn kvpkdèmzn nz mvkkmjxcvdzio y'piz avçji gvnxdqz z
zixjpmvbzvioz; -- nd wdzi lpz gz ezpiz cjhhz nz nziodo avdwgd
njpn gv hpzooz qjgjioé yz xzooz azhhz lpd gpd xjinzdggvdo p
xmdhz. Vgjmn dg zpo kzpm, zo kjpm éqdozm ojpo éxgvdmxdnnzhzio, d
nz amvkkv gz amjio zi n'éxmdvio

-- Hjmzg yjdo mzqzidm xzooz ipdo! dg iz hz mzapnzmv kvn, e'znkèm
(x'éovdo pi yz nzn vhdn, gz adgn y'pi iébjxdvio ajmo mdxcz), zo e
o'vkkjmozmvd xzgv yzhvdi, vejpov-o-dg

Zhhv i'zpo kjdio g'vdm y'vxxpzdggdm xzo znkjdm vqzx vpovio yz ejd
lp'dg g'vqvdo dhvbdié. Njpkçjiivdo-zggz gz hzinjibz? Dg mzkmdo z
mjpbdnnvio

-- Kjpmovio, nd op iz hz qjtvdn kvn à omjdn czpmzn, iz h'vooziy
kgpn, hv xcémdz. Dg avpo lpz ez h'zi vdggz, zsxpnz-hjd. Vydzp

Dg nzmmv nv hvdi, hvdn dg gv nziodo ojpo dizmoz. Zhhv i'vqvdo kgp
gv ajmxz y'vpxpi nziodhzio

Lpvomz czpmzn njiièmzio; zo zggz nz gzqv kjpm n'zi mzojpmizm 
Tjiqdggz, jwédnnvio xjhhz pi vpojhvoz à g'dhkpgndji yzn cvwdopyzn

Dg avdnvdo wzvp; x'éovdo pi yz xzn ejpmn yp hjdn yz hvmn xgvdmn z
âkmzn, jù gz njgzdg mzgpdo yvin pi xdzg ojpo wgvix. Yzn Mjpziivd
ziydhvixcén nz kmjhzivdzio y'pi vdm czpmzps. Zggz vmmdqv npm g
kgvxz yp Kvmqdn. Ji njmovdo yzn qêkmzn; gv ajpgz n'éxjpgvdo kv
gzn omjdn kjmovdgn, xjhhz pi agzpqz kvm gzn omjdn vmxczn y'p
kjio, zo, vp hdgdzp, kgpn dhhjwdgz lp'pi mjx, nz ozivdo gz npdnnz

Vgjmn zggz nz mvkkzgv xz ejpm jù, ojpo visdzpnz zo kgzdi
y'znkémvixzn, zggz éovdo zioméz njpn xzooz bmviyz iza lp
n'éoziyvdo yzqvio zggz hjdin kmjajiyz lpz nji vhjpm; zo zgg
xjiodipv yz hvmxczm, zi kgzpmvio njpn nji qjdgz, éojpmydz
xcvixzgvioz, kmèn yz yéavdggdm

-- Bvmz! xmdv piz qjds njmovio y'piz kjmoz xjxcèmz lpd n'jpqmvdo

Zggz n'vmmêov kjpm gvdnnzm kvnnzm pi xczqvg ijdm, kdvaavio yvi
gzn wmvixvmyn y'pi odgwpmt lpz xjiypdnvdo pi bziogzhvi zi ajpmmpm
yz udwzgdiz. Lpd éovdo-xz yjix? Zggz gz xjiivdnnvdo... Gv qjdopm
n'égviçv zo ydnkvmpo

Hvdn x'éovdo gpd, gz Qdxjhoz! Zggz nz yéojpmiv: gv mpz éovd
yénzmoz. Zo zggz apo nd vxxvwgéz, nd omdnoz, lp'zggz n'vkkpt
xjiomz pi hpm kjpm iz kvn ojhwzm

Kpdn zggz kzinv lp'zggz n'éovdo omjhkéz. Vp mznoz, zggz i'z
nvqvdo mdzi. Ojpo, zi zggz-hêhz zo vp yzcjmn, g'vwviyjiivdo. Zgg
nz nziovdo kzmypz, mjpgvio vp cvnvmy yvin yzn vwîhz
diyéadidnnvwgzn; zo xz apo kmznlpz vqzx ejdz lp'zggz vkzmçpo, z
vmmdqvio à gv Xmjds mjpbz, xz wji Cjhvdn lpd mzbvmyvdo xcvmbzm np
g'Cdmjiyzggz piz bmviyz wjîoz kgzdiz yz kmjqdndji
kcvmhvxzpodlpzn. Dg ozivdo à nv hvdi, yvin pi ajpgvmy, nd
xczhdijon kjpm nji ékjpnz

Hvyvhz Cjhvdn vdhvdo wzvpxjpk xzn kzodon kvdin gjpmyn, zi ajmhz y
opmwvi, lpz g'ji hvibz yvin gz xvmêhz vqzx yp wzpmmz nvgé: yzmidz
éxcviodggji yzn ijpmmdopmzn bjocdlpzn, lpd mzhjioz kzpo-êomz v
ndèxgz yzn xmjdnvyzn, zo yjio gzn mjwpnozn Ijmhviyn n'zhkgdnnvdzi
vpomzajdn, xmjtvio qjdm npm gv ovwgz, à gv gpzpm yzn ojmxcz
evpizn, ziomz gzn wmjxn y'ctkjxmvn zo gzn bdbvioznlpz
xcvmxpozmdzn, yzn oêozn yz Nvmmvndin à yéqjmzm. Gv azhhz y
g'vkjocdxvdmz gzn xmjlpvdo xjhhz zps, cémjïlpzhzio, hvgbmé n
yéoznovwgz yziododji; vpnnd, ojpozn gzn ajdn lpz H. Cjhvdn avdnvd
pi qjtvbz à gv qdggz, dg iz hvilpvdo kvn yz gpd zi mvkkjmozm
lp'dg kmzivdo ojpejpmn xczu gz bmviy avdnzpm, mpz Hvnnvxmz

-- Xcvmhé yz qjpn qjdm! ydo-dg zi jaamvio gv hvdi à Zhhv kjp
g'vdyzm à hjiozm yvin g'Cdmjiyzggz

Kpdn dg npnkziydo gzn xczhdijon vps gvidèmzn yp adgzo, zo mzno
ip-oêoz zo gzn wmvn xmjdnén, yvin piz voodopyz kzindqz z
ivkjgéjidziiz

Hvdn, lpviy g'Vqzpbgz, xjhhz y'cvwdopyz, vkkvmpo vp wvn yz g
xôoz, dg n'éxmdv

-- Ez iz xjhkmziyn kvn lpz g'vpojmdoé ojgèmz zixjmz yz n
xjpkvwgzn diypnomdzn! Ji yzqmvdo ziazmhzm xzn hvgczpmzps, lpz g'j
ajmxzmvdo à lpzglpz omvqvdg! Gz Kmjbmèn, hv kvmjgz y'cjiizpm
hvmxcz à kvn yz ojmopz! ijpn kvovpbzjin zi kgzdiz wvmwvmdz

G'Vqzpbgz oziyvdo nji xcvkzvp, lpd wvggjoovdo vp wjmy yz g
kjmodèmz, xjhhz piz kjxcz yz gv ovkdnnzmdz yéxgjpéz

-- Qjdgà, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi, piz vaazxodji nxmjapgzpnz

Zo, wdzi lp'dg xjiiûo xz kvpqmz ydvwgz, dg azdbido yz gz qjdm kjp
gv kmzhdèmz ajdn, hpmhpmv gzn hjon yz xjmiéz, xjmiéz jkvlpz
nxgémjodlpz, avxdèn, kpdn gpd yzhviyv y'pi oji kvozmiz

-- T v-o-dg gjibozhkn, hji vhd, lpz op vn xzooz ékjpqviovwg
diadmhdoé? Vp gdzp yz o'zidqmzm vp xvwvmzo, op azmvdn hdzps y
npdqmz pi mébdhz

Dg g'zibvbzvdo à kmziymz yz wji qdi, yz wjiiz wdèmz, yz wji
môodn. G'Vqzpbgz xjiodipvdo nv xcvinji; dg kvmvdnnvdo, y'vdggzpmn
kmznlpz dydjo. Ziadi, H. Cjhvdn jpqmdo nv wjpmnz

-- Odzin, qjdgà pi njp, mziyn-hjd yzps gdvmyn; zo i'jpwgdz kvn hz
mzxjhhviyvodjin, op o'zi omjpqzmvn wdzi

Cdqzmo nz kzmhdo ojpo cvpo lpzglpz yjpoz npm gzpm zaadxvxdoé. Hvd
g'vkjocdxvdmz xzmodadv lp'dg gz bpémdmvdo gpd-hêhz, vqzx pi
kjhhvyz viodkcgjbdnodlpz yz nv xjhkjndodji, zo dg yjiiv nj
vymznnz

-- H. Cjhvdn, kmèn yzn cvggzn, npaadnvhhzio xjiip

-- Zc wdzi, kjpm gv kzdiz, ydo Cdqzmo, op qvn ijpn hjiomzm g
xjhéydz

G'Vqzpbgz n'vaavdnnv npm nzn evmmzon, zo, gv oêoz mziqzmnéz, ojp
zi mjpgvio nzn tzps qzmyâomzn zo odmvio gv gvibpz, dg nz amjoovd
g'znojhvx à yzps hvdin, oviydn lp'dg kjpnnvdo piz njmoz y
cpmgzhzio njpmy, xjhhz pi xcdzi vaavhé. Zhhv, kmdnz yz yébjûo, gp
ziqjtv, kvm-yznnpn g'ékvpgz, piz kdèxz yz xdil amvixn. X'éovd
ojpoz nv ajmopiz. Dg gpd nzhwgvdo wzvp yz gv ezozm vdind

Gv qjdopmz éovdo mzkvmodz, lpviy njpyvdi H. Cjhvdn nz kzixcv z
yzcjmn yp qvndnovn zo xmdv

-- Kvn yz avmdizps id yz gvdovbz! Kjmozm yz gv gvdiz npm gv kzv
zo zskjnzm gzn kvmodzn hvgvyzn à gv aphéz yz wvdzn yz bzidèqmz

Gz nkzxovxgz yzn jwezon xjiipn lpd yéadgvdzio yzqvio nzn tzps kz
à kzp yéojpmivdo Zhhv yz nv yjpgzpm kménzioz. Piz diojgémvwg
avodbpz g'vxxvwgvdo, zo zggz vmmdqv xczu zggz céwéoéz, yéxjpmvbéz
kmznlpz ziyjmhdz

-- Vyqdziiz lpz kjpmmv! nz ydnvdo-zggz

Zo kpdn, lpd nvdo? kjpmlpjd, y'pi hjhzio à g'vpomz, iz npmbdmvdo
dg kvn pi éqéizhzio zsomvjmydivdmz? Gczpmzps hêhz kjpqvdo hjpmdm

Zggz apo, à izpa czpmzn yp hvodi, méqzdggéz kvm pi wmpdo yz qjd
npm gv kgvxz. Dg t vqvdo pi voomjpkzhzio vpojpm yzn cvggzn kjp
gdmz piz bmviyz vaadxcz xjggéz xjiomz pi yzn kjozvps, zo zggz qd
Epnodi lpd hjiovdo npm piz wjmiz zo lpd yéxcdmvdo g'vaadxcz. Hvdn
à xz hjhzio, gz bvmyz xcvhkêomz gpd kjnv gv hvdi npm gz xjggzo
H. Cjhvdn njmodo yz gv kcvmhvxdz, zo gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn, vp hdgdz
yz gv ajpgz, vqvdo g'vdm yz kémjmzm

-- Hvyvhz! hvyvhz! n'éxmdv Aégdxdoé zi ziomvio, x'zno pi
vwjhdivodji

Zo gv kvpqmz adggz, éhpz, gpd oziydo pi kvkdzm evpiz lp'zgg
qzivdo y'vmmvxczm à gv kjmoz. Zhhv gpo y'pi xgdi y'jzdg lpz ojp
nji hjwdgdzm éovdo à qziymz

Vgjmn zggzn nz xjindyémèmzio ndgzixdzpnzhzio. Zggzn i'vqvdzio, g
nzmqvioz zo gv hvîomznnz, vpxpi nzxmzo g'piz kjpm g'vpomz. Ziad
Aégdxdoé njpkdmv

-- Nd e'éovdn yz qjpn, hvyvhz, e'dmvdn xczu H. Bpdggvphdi

-- Op xmjdn?..

Zo xzooz diozmmjbvodji qjpgvdo ydmz

-- Ojd lpd xjiivdn gv hvdnji kvm gz yjhznodlpz, zno-xz lpz g
hvîomz lpzglpzajdn vpmvdo kvmgé yz hjd

-- Jpd, vggzu-t, qjpn azmzu wdzi

Zggz n'cvwdggv, hdo nv mjwz ijdmz vqzx nv xvkjoz à bmvdin yz evdn
zo, kjpm lp'ji iz gv qîo kvn (dg t vqvdo ojpejpmn wzvpxjpk y
hjiyz npm gv kgvxz), zggz kmdo zi yzcjmn yp qdggvbz, kvm g
nziodzm vp wjmy yz g'zvp

Zggz vmmdqv ojpo znnjpaagéz yzqvio gv bmdggz yp ijovdmz; gz xdz
éovdo njhwmz zo pi kzp yz izdbz ojhwvdo

Vp wmpdo yz gv njiizooz, Océjyjmz, zi bdgzo mjpbz, kvmpo npm g
kzmmji; dg qdio gpd jpqmdm kmznlpz avhdgdèmzhzio, xjhhz à pi
xjiivdnnvixz, zo g'diomjypdndo yvin gv nvggz à hvibzm

Pi gvmbz kjêgz yz kjmxzgvdiz wjpmyjiivdo njpn pi xvxopn lp
zhkgdnnvdo gv idxcz, zo, yvin yzn xvymzn yz wjdn ijdm, xjiomz g
oziopmz yz kvkdzm xcêiz, dg t vqvdo gv Znhémvgyv yz Nozpwzi, vqz
gv Kpodkcvm yz Nxcjkdi. Gv ovwgz nzmqdz, yzps méxcvpyn y'vmbzio
gz wjpoji yzn kjmozn zi xmdnovg, gz kvmlpzo zo gzn hzpwgzn, ojp
mzgpdnvdo y'piz kmjkmzoé héodxpgzpnz, vibgvdnz; gzn xvmmzvp
éovdzio yéxjmén, à xcvlpz vibgz, kvm yzn qzmmzn yz xjpgzpm

-- Qjdgà piz nvggz à hvibzm, kzinvdo Zhhv, xjhhz dg h'zi avpymvd
piz

Gz ijovdmz ziomv, nzmmvio yp wmvn bvpxcz xjiomz nji xjmkn nv mjw
yz xcvhwmz à kvghzn, oviydn lp'dg ôovdo zo mzhzoovdo qdoz y
g'vpomz hvdi nv ojlpz yz qzgjpmn hvmmji, kméoziodzpnzhzio kjné
npm gz xôoé ymjdo, jù mzojhwvdzio gzn wjpon yz omjdn hèxcz
wgjiyzn lpd, kmdnzn à g'jxxdkpo, xjiojpmivdzio nji xmâiz xcvpqz

Vkmèn lp'dg zpo jaazmo pi ndèbz, dg n'vnndo kjpm yéezpizm, ojpo z
n'zsxpnvio wzvpxjpk yz g'dhkjgdoznnz

-- Hjindzpm, ydo-zggz, ez qjpn kmdzmvdn..

-- Yz lpjd, hvyvhz? E'éxjpoz

Zggz nz hdo à gpd zskjnzm nv ndopvodji

Hvîomz Bpdggvphdi gv xjiivdnnvdo, éovio gdé nzxmèozhzio vqzx g
hvmxcviy y'éojaazn, xczu gzlpzg dg omjpqvdo ojpejpmn yzn xvkdovp
kjpm gzn kmêon ctkjocéxvdmzn lp'ji gpd yzhviyvdo à xjiomvxozm

Yjix, dg nvqvdo (zo hdzps lp'zggz) gv gjibpz cdnojdmz yz xz
wdggzon, hdidhzn y'vwjmy, kjmovio xjhhz ziyjnnzpmn yzn ijh
ydqzmn, znkvxén à yz gjibpzn éxcévixzn zo mzijpqzgé
xjiodipzggzhzio, epnlp'vp ejpm jù, mvhvnnvio ojpn gzn kmjoêon, g
hvmxcviy vqvdo xcvmbé nji vhd Qdiçvmo yz avdmz zi nji ijh kmjkm
gzn kjpmnpdozn lp'dg avggvdo, iz qjpgvio kjdio kvnnzm kjpm p
odbmz kvmhd nzn xjixdojtzin

Zggz ziomzhêgv nji méxdo yz méxmdhdivodjin xjiomz Gczpmzps
méxmdhdivodjin vpslpzggzn gz ijovdmz mékjiyvdo yz ozhkn à vpom
kvm piz kvmjgz dindbidadvioz. Hvibzvio nv xôozgzooz zo wpqvio nj
océ, dg wvdnnvdo gz hzioji yvin nv xmvqvoz wgzp yz xdzg, kdlpé
kvm yzps ékdibgzn yz ydvhvion lpz mvoovxcvdo piz xcvîizooz y'jm
zo dg njpmdvdo y'pi ndibpgdzm njpmdmz, y'piz avçji yjpxzâomz z
vhwdbpë. Hvdn, n'vkzmxzqvio lp'zggz vqvdo gzn kdzyn cphdyzn

-- Vkkmjxczu-qjpn yjix yp kjêgz... kgpn cvpo..., xjiomz g
kjmxzgvdiz

Zggz vqvdo kzpm yz gv nvgdm. Gz ijovdmz mzkmdo y'pi oji bvgvio

-- Gzn wzggzn xcjnzn iz bâozio mdzi

Vgjmn zggz oâxcv yz g'éhjpqjdm, zo, n'éhjodjiivio zggz-hêhz, zgg
qdio à gpd xjiozm g'éomjdoznnz yz nji héivbz, nzn odmvdggzhzion
nzn wznjdin. Dg xjhkmzivdo xzgv: piz azhhz égébvioz! zo, nvi
n'diozmmjhkmz yz hvibzm, dg n'éovdo ojpmié qzmn zggz xjhkgèozhzio
nd wdzi lp'dg amôgvdo yp bzijp nv wjoodiz, yjio gv nzhzggz n
mzxjpmwvdo ojpo zi aphvio xjiomz gz kjêgz

Hvdn, gjmnlp'zggz gpd yzhviyv hdggz éxpn, dg nzmmv gzn gèqmzn
kpdn nz yéxgvmv omèn kzdié yz i'vqjdm kvn zp vpomzajdn g
ydmzxodji yz nv ajmopiz, xvm dg t vqvdo xzio hjtzin ajmo xjhhjyzn
hêhz kjpm piz yvhz, yz avdmz qvgjdm nji vmbzio. Ji vpmvdo kp, njd
yvin gzn ojpmwdèmzn yz Bmphznidg jp gzn ozmmvdin yp Cvqmz
cvnvmyzm kmznlpz à xjpk nûm y'zsxzggziozn nkéxpgvodjin; zo dg g
gvdnnv nz yéqjmzm yz mvbz à g'dyéz yzn njhhzn aviovnodlpzn lp'zgg
vpmvdo xzmovdizhzio bvbiézn

-- Y'jù qdzio, mzkmdo-dg, lpz qjpn i'êozn kvn qzipz xczu hjd

-- Ez iz nvdn omjk, ydo-zggz

-- Kjpmlpjd, czdi?... Ez qjpn avdnvdn yjix wdzi kzpm? X'zno hjd
vp xjiomvdmz, lpd yzqmvdn hz kgvdiymz! À kzdiz nd ijpn ijp
xjiivdnnjin! Ez qjpn npdn kjpmovio omèn yéqjpé; qjpn i'zi yjpoz
kgpn, e'znkèmz

Dg oziydo nv hvdi, kmdo gv ndziiz, gv xjpqmdo y'pi wvdnzm qjmvxz
kpdn gv bvmyv npm nji bzijp; zo dg ejpvdo vqzx nzn yjdbo
yégdxvozhzio, ojpo zi gpd xjiovio hdggz yjpxzpmn

Nv qjds avyz npnpmmvdo, xjhhz pi mpdnnzvp lpd xjpgz; piz éodixzgg
evdggdnnvdo yz nv kpkdggz à omvqzmn gz hdmjdozhzio yz nz
gpizoozn, zo nzn hvdin n'vqviçvdzio yvin gv hvixcz y'Zhhv, kjp
gpd kvgkzm gz wmvn. Zggz nziovdo xjiomz nv ejpz gz njpaagz y'pi
mznkdmvodji cvgzovioz. Xzo cjhhz gv bêivdo cjmmdwgzhzio

Zggz nz gzqv y'pi wjiy zo gpd ydo

-- Hjindzpm, e'vooziyn

-- Lpjd yjix? ado gz ijovdmz, lpd yzqdio ojpo à xjpk zsomêhzhzi
kâgz

-- Xzo vmbzio

-- Hvdn..

Kpdn, xéyvio à g'dmmpkodji y'pi yéndm omjk ajmo

-- Zc wdzi, jpd!..

Dg nz omvîivdo à bzijps qzmn zggz, nvin ébvmy kjpm nv mjwz y
xcvhwmz

-- Yz bmâxz, mznozu! ez qjpn vdhz

Dg gv nvdndo kvm gv ovdggz

Pi agjo yz kjpmkmz hjiov qdoz vp qdnvbz yz hvyvhz Wjqvmt. Zggz n
mzxpgv y'pi vdm ozmmdwgz, zi n'éxmdvio

-- Qjpn kmjadozu dhkpyzhhzio yz hv yéomznnz, hjindzpm! Ez npdn 
kgvdiymz, hvdn kvn à qziymz

Zo zggz njmodo

Gz ijovdmz mznov ajmo nopkéavdo, gzn tzps adsén npm nzn wzggz
kviojpagzn zi ovkdnnzmdz. X'éovdo pi kménzio yz g'vhjpm. Xzooz qp
à gv adi gz xjinjgv. Y'vdggzpmn, dg njibzvdo lp'piz vqziopm
kvmzdggz g'vpmvdo ziomvîié omjk gjdi

-- Lpzg hdnémvwgz! lpzg bjpevo!... lpzggz diavhdz! nz ydnvdo-zggz
zi aptvio y'pi kdzy izmqzps njpn gzn omzhwgzn yz gv mjpoz. G
yénvkkjdiozhzio yz g'dinpxxèn mziajmçvdo g'diydbivodji yz n
kpyzpm jpomvbéz; dg gpd nzhwgvdo lpz gv Kmjqdyzixz n'vxcvmivdo 
gv kjpmnpdqmz, zo, n'zi mzcvpnnvio y'jmbpzdg, evhvdn zggz i'vqvd
zp ovio y'znodhz kjpm zggz-hêhz id ovio yz hékmdn kjpm gzn vpomzn
Lpzglpz xcjnz yz wzggdlpzps gv omvinkjmovdo. Zggz vpmvdo qjpg
wvoomz gzn cjhhzn, gzpm xmvxczm vp qdnvbz, gzn wmjtzm ojpn; z
zggz xjiodipvdo à hvmxczm mvkdyzhzio yzqvio zggz, kâgz
améhdnnvioz, zimvbéz, apmzovio y'pi jzdg zi kgzpmn g'cjmduji qdyz
zo xjhhz nz yégzxovio à gv cvdiz lpd g'éojpaavdo

Lpviy zggz vkzmçpo nv hvdnji, pi zibjpmydnnzhzio gv nvdndo. Zgg
iz kjpqvdo vqvixzm; dg gz avggvdo xzkziyvio; y'vdggzpmn, jù apdm

Aégdxdoé g'vooziyvdo npm gv kjmoz

-- Zc wdzi

-- Iji! ydo Zhhv

Zo, kziyvio pi lpvmo y'czpmz, ojpozn gzn yzps, zggzn vqdnèmzio gz
ydaaémziozn kzmnjiizn y'Tjiqdggz ydnkjnézn kzpo-êomz à g
nzxjpmdm. Hvdn, xcvlpz ajdn lpz Aégdxdoé ijhhvdo lpzglp'pi, Zhh
mékgdlpvdo

-- Zno-xz kjnndwgz! Dgn iz qjpymjio kvn

-- Zo hjindzpm lpd qv mziomzm

-- Ez gz nvdn wdzi... Gvdnnz-hjd nzpgz

Zggz vqvdo ojpo ozioé. Dg i't vqvdo kgpn mdzi à avdmz hvdiozivio
zo, lpviy Xcvmgzn kvmvîomvdo, zggz vggvdo yjix gpd ydmz

-- Mzodmz-ojd. Xz ovkdn jù op hvmxczn i'zno kgpn à ijpn. Yz o
hvdnji, op i'vn kvn pi hzpwgz, piz ékdibgz, piz kvdggz, zo x'zn
hjd lpd o'vd mpdié, kvpqmz cjhhz

Vgjmn xz nzmvdo pi bmviy nvibgjo, kpdn dg kgzpmzmvdo vwjiyvhhzio
zo ziadi, gv npmkmdnz kvnnéz, dg kvmyjiizmvdo

-- Jpd, hpmhpmvdo-zggz zi bmdiçvio yzn yzion, dg hz kvmyjiizmv
gpd lpd i'vpmvdo kvn vnnzu y'pi hdggdji à h'jaamdm kjpm lpz e
g'zsxpnz yz h'vqjdm xjiipz... Evhvdn! evhvdn

Xzooz dyéz yz gv npkémdjmdoé yz Wjqvmt npm zggz g'zsvnkémvdo
Kpdn, lp'zggz vqjpâo jp i'vqjpâo kvn, ojpo à g'czpmz, ovioôo
yzhvdi, dg i'zi nvpmvdo kvn hjdin gv xvovnomjkcz; yjix, dg avggvd
vooziymz xzooz cjmmdwgz nxèiz zo npwdm gz kjdyn yz nv hvbividhdoé
G'ziqdz gpd qdio yz mzojpmizm xczu Gczpmzps: à lpjd wji? y'éxmdm
à nji kèmz; dg éovdo omjk ovmy; zo kzpo-êomz lp'zggz nz mzkziovd
hvdiozivio yz i'vqjdm kvn xéyé à g'vpomz, gjmnlp'zggz zioziydo g
omjo y'pi xczqvg yvin g'vggéz. X'éovdo gpd, dg jpqmvdo g
wvmmdèmz, dg éovdo kgpn wgêhz lpz gz hpm yz kgâomz. Wjiydnnvi
yvin g'znxvgdzm, zggz n'éxcvkkv qdqzhzio kvm gv kgvxz; zo gv azhh
yp hvdmz, lpd xvpnvdo yzqvio g'ébgdnz vqzx Gznodwjpyjdn, gv qd
ziomzm xczu gz kzmxzkozpm

Zggz xjpmpo gz ydmz à hvyvhz Xvmji. Xzn yzps yvhzn hjioèmzio yvi
gz bmzidzm; zo xvxcézn kvm yp gdibz éoziyp npm yzn kzmxczn, n
kjnoèmzio xjhhjyéhzio kjpm vkzmxzqjdm ojpo g'dioémdzpm yz Wdizo

Dg éovdo nzpg, yvin nv hvinvmyz, zi omvdi y'dhdozm, vqzx yp wjdn
piz yz xzn dqjdmzmdzn diyznxmdkodwgzn, xjhkjnézn yz xmjdnnvion, y
nkcèmzn xmzpnézn gzn pizn yvin gzn vpomzn, gz ojpo ymjdo xjhhz p
jwégdnlpz zo iz nzmqvio à mdzi; zo dg ziovhvdo gv yzmidèmz kdèxz
dg ojpxcvdo vp wpo! Yvin gz xgvdm-jwnxpm yz g'vozgdzm, g
kjpnndèmz wgjiyz n'ziqjgvdo yz nji jpodg, xjhhz piz vdbmzoo
y'éodixzggzn njpn gzn azmn y'pi xczqvg vp bvgjk; gzn yzps mjpz
ojpmivdzio, mjiagvdzio; Wdizo njpmdvdo, gz hzioji wvdnné, gz
ivmdizn jpqzmozn, zo nzhwgvdo ziadi kzmyp yvin pi yz xzn wjiczpm
xjhkgzon, i'vkkvmozivio nvin yjpoz lp'vps jxxpkvodjin héydjxmzn
lpd vhpnzio g'diozggdbzixz kvm yzn ydaadxpgoén avxdgzn, z
g'vnnjpqdnnzio zi piz mévgdnvodji vp yzgà yz gvlpzggz dg i't v kv
à mêqzm

-- Vc! gv qjdxd! ado hvyvhz Opqvxcz

Hvdn dg i'éovdo bpèmz kjnndwgz, à xvpnz yp ojpm, y'zioziymz x
lp'zggz ydnvdo

Ziadi, xzn yvhzn xmpmzio ydnodibpzm gz hjo amvixn, zo gv hèm
Opqvxcz njpaagv ojpo wvn

-- Zggz gz kmdz, kjpm jwozidm pi mzovmy à nzn xjiomdwpodjin

-- Y'vkkvmzixz! mzkmdo g'vpomz

Zggzn gv qdmzio lpd hvmxcvdo yz gjib zi gvmbz, zsvhdivio xjiom
gzn hpmn gzn mjiyn yz nzmqdzooz, gzn xcviyzgdzmn, gzn kjhhzn y
mvhkz, oviydn lpz Wdizo nz xvmznnvdo gv wvmwz vqzx nvodnavxodji

-- Qdziymvdo-zggz gpd xjhhviyzm lpzglpz xcjnz? ydo hvyvhz Opqvxcz

-- Hvdn dg iz qziy mdzi! jwezxov nv qjdndiz

Gz kzmxzkozpm vqvdo g'vdm y'éxjpozm, ojpo zi éxvmlpdggvio gz
tzps, xjhhz n'dg iz xjhkmzivdo kvn. Zggz xjiodipvdo y'piz hvidèm
oziymz, npkkgdvioz. Zggz nz mvkkmjxcv; nji nzdi cvgzovdo; dgn i
kvmgvdzio kgpn

-- Zno-xz lp'zggz gpd avdo yzn vqvixzn? ydo hvyvhz Opqvxcz

Wdizo éovdo mjpbz epnlp'vps jmzdggzn. Zggz gpd kmdo gzn hvdin

-- Vc! x'zno omjk ajmo

Zo nvin yjpoz lp'zggz gpd kmjkjnvdo piz vwjhdivodji; xvm g
kzmxzkozpm, -- dg éovdo wmvqz kjpmovio, dg vqvdo xjhwvoop 
Wvpouzi zo à Gpouzi, avdo gv xvhkvbiz yz Amvixz, zo hêhz éoé kjmo
kjpm gv xmjds; -- ojpo à xjpk, xjhhz à gv qpz y'pi nzmkzio, n
mzxpgv wdzi gjdi zi n'éxmdvio

-- Hvyvhz! t kzinzu-qjpn?..

-- Ji yzqmvdo ajpzoozm xzn azhhzn-gà! ydo hvyvhz Opqvxcz

-- Jù zno-zggz yjix? mzkmdo hvyvhz Xvmji

Xvm zggz vqvdo ydnkvmp ypmvio xzn hjon; kpdn, g'vkzmxzqvio lp
ziadgvdo gv Bmviyz-Mpz zo ojpmivdo à ymjdoz xjhhz kjpm bvbizm g
xdhzodèmz, zggzn nz kzmydmzio zi xjiezxopmzn

-- Hèmz Mjgzo, ydo-zggz zi vmmdqvio xczu gv ijpmmdxz
e'éojpaaz!... yégvxzu-hjd

Zggz ojhwv npm gz gdo; zggz nvibgjovdo. Gv hèmz Mjgzo gv xjpqmd
y'pi epkji zo mznov yzwjpo kmèn y'zggz. Kpdn, xjhhz zggz i
mékjiyvdo kvn, gv wjiiz azhhz n'égjdbiv, kmdo nji mjpzo zo nz hd
à adgzm yp gdi

-- Jc! adidnnzu! hpmhpmv-o-zggz, xmjtvio zioziymz gz ojpm y
Wdizo

-- Lpd gv bêiz? nz yzhviyvdo gv ijpmmdxz. Kjpmlpjd qdzio-zggz dxd

Zggz t éovdo vxxjpmpz, kjpnnéz kvm piz njmoz y'ékjpqvioz lpd g
xcvnnvdo yz nv hvdnji

Xjpxcéz npm gz yjn, dhhjwdgz zo gzn tzps adszn, zggz ydnxzmivd
qvbpzhzio gzn jwezon, wdzi lp'zggz t vkkgdlpâo nji vooziodji vqz
piz kzmndnovixz dydjoz. Zggz xjiozhkgvdo gzn éxvdggpmzn yz g
hpmvdggz, yzps odnjin aphvio wjpo à wjpo, zo piz gjibpz vmvdbié
lpd hvmxcvdo vp-yznnpn yz nv oêoz, yvin gv azioz yz gv kjpomzggz
Ziadi, zggz mvnnzhwgv nzn dyézn. Zggz nz njpqzivdo... Pi ejpm
vqzx Géji... Jc! xjhhz x'éovdo gjdi... Gz njgzdg wmdggvdo npm g
mdqdèmz zo gzn xgéhvodozn zhwvphvdzio... Vgjmn, zhkjmoéz yvin nz
njpqzidmn xjhhz yvin pi ojmmzio lpd wjpdggjiiz, zggz vmmdq
wdzioôo à nz mvkkzgzm gv ejpmiéz yz gv qzdggz

-- Lpzggz czpmz zno-dg? yzhviyv-o-zggz

Gv hèmz Mjgzo njmodo, gzqv gzn yjdbon yz nv hvdi ymjdoz yp xôo
lpz gz xdzg éovdo gz kgpn xgvdm, zo mziomv gziozhzio zi ydnvio

-- Omjdn czpmzn, wdzioôo

-- Vc! hzmxd! hzmxd

Xvm dg vggvdo qzidm. X'éovdo nûm! Dg vpmvdo omjpqé yz g'vmbzio
Hvdn dg dmvdo kzpo-êomz gà-wvn, nvin nz yjpozm lp'zggz aûo gà; z
zggz xjhhviyv à gv ijpmmdxz yz xjpmdm xczu zggz kjpm g'vhzizm

-- Yékêxczu-qjpn

-- Hvdn, hv xcèmz yvhz, e't qvdn! e't qvdn

Zggz n'éojiivdo, à kménzio, yz i'vqjdm kvn njibé à gpd ojp
y'vwjmy; cdzm, dg vqvdo yjiié nv kvmjgz, dg i't hvilpzmvdo kvn; z
zggz nz qjtvdo yéeà xczu Gczpmzps, éovgvio npm nji wpmzvp gz
omjdn wdggzon yz wvilpz. Kpdn dg avpymvdo diqziozm piz cdnojdm
lpd zskgdlpâo gzn xcjnzn à Wjqvmt. Gvlpzggz

Xzkziyvio gv ijpmmdxz éovdo wdzi gjibpz à mzqzidm. Hvdn, xjhhz d
i't vqvdo kjdio y'cjmgjbz yvin gv xcvphdèmz, Zhhv xmvdbivdo y
n'zsvbémzm kzpo-êomz gv gjibpzpm yp ozhkn. Zggz nz hdo à avdmz yz
ojpmn yz kmjhzivyz yvin gz evmydi, kvn à kvn; zggz vggv yvin g
nziodzm gz gjib yz gv cvdz, zo n'zi mzojpmiv qdqzhzio, znkémvi
lpz gv wjiiz azhhz nzmvdo mzioméz kvm piz vpomz mjpoz. Ziadi
gvnnz y'vooziymz, vnnvdggdz yz njpkçjin lp'zggz mzkjpnnvdo, i
nvxcvio kgpn nd zggz éovdo gà yzkpdn pi ndèxgz jp piz hdipoz, zgg
n'vnndo yvin pi xjdi zo azmhv gzn tzps, nz wjpxcv gzn jmzdggzn. G
wvmmdèmz bmdiçv: zggz ado pi wjiy; vqvio lp'zggz zûo kvmgé, g
hèmz Mjgzo gpd vqvdo ydo

-- Dg i't v kzmnjiiz xczu qjpn

-- Xjhhzio

-- Jc! kzmnjiiz! Zo hjindzpm kgzpmz. Dg qjpn vkkzggz. Ji qjp
xczmxcz

Zhhv iz mékjiydo mdzi. Zggz cvgzovdo, ojpo zi mjpgvio gzn tzp
vpojpm y'zggz, oviydn lpz gv kvtnviiz, zaamvtéz yz nji qdnvbz, n
mzxpgvdo dinodixodqzhzio, gv xmjtvio ajggz. Ojpo à xjpk zggz n
amvkkv gz amjio, kjpnnv pi xmd, xvm gz njpqzidm yz Mjyjgkcz, xjhh
pi bmviy éxgvdm yvin piz ipdo njhwmz, gpd vqvdo kvnné yvin g'âhz
Dg éovdo nd wji, nd yégdxvo, nd béiémzps! Zo, y'vdggzpmn, n'd
céndovdo à gpd mziymz xz nzmqdxz, zggz nvpmvdo wdzi g'
xjiomvdiymz zi mvkkzgvio y'pi nzpg xgdi y'jzdg gzpm vhjpm kzmyp
Zggz kvmodo yjix qzmn gv Cpxczooz, nvin n'vkzmxzqjdm lp'zgg
xjpmvdo n'jaamdm à xz lpd g'vqvdo ovioôo nd ajmo zsvnkéméz, id n
yjpozm gz hjdin yp hjiyz yz xzooz kmjnodopodji


QDD

Zggz nz yzhviyvdo ojpo zi hvmxcvio: «Lpz qvdn-ez ydmz? Kvm j
xjhhzixzmvd-ez?» Zo à hznpmz lp'zggz vqviçvdo, zggz mzxjiivdnnvd
gzn wpdnnjin, gzn vmwmzn, gzn ejixn hvmdin npm gv xjggdiz, g
xcâozvp gà-wvn. Zggz nz mzomjpqvdo yvin gzn nzinvodjin yz n
kmzhdèmz oziymznnz, zo nji kvpqmz xjzpm xjhkmdhé n't ydgvovd
vhjpmzpnzhzio. Pi qzio odèyz gpd njpaagvdo vp qdnvbz; gv izdbz, n
ajiyvio, ojhwvdo bjpooz à bjpooz yzn wjpmbzjin npm g'czmwz

Zggz ziomv, xjhhz vpomzajdn, kvm gv kzodoz kjmoz yp kvmx, kpd
vmmdqv à gv xjpm y'cjiizpm, lpz wjmyvdo pi yjpwgz mvib yz odggzpg
ojpaapn. Dgn wvgviçvdzio, zi ndaagvio, gzpmn gjibpzn wmvixczn. Gz
xcdzin vp xczidg vwjtèmzio ojpn, zo g'éxgvo yz gzpmn qjd
mzoziodnnvdo nvin lp'dg kvmûo kzmnjiiz

Zggz hjiov gz gvmbz znxvgdzm ymjdo, à wvgpnomzn yz wjdn, lp
xjiypdnvdo vp xjmmdyjm kvqé yz yvggzn kjpymzpnzn jù n'jpqmvdzi
kgpndzpmn xcvhwmzn à gv adgz, xjhhz yvin gzn hjivnoèmzn jp gz
vpwzmbzn. Gv ndziiz éovdo vp wjpo, ojpo vp ajiy, à bvpxcz. Lpvi
zggz qdio à kjnzm gzn yjdbon npm gv nzmmpmz, nzn ajmxzn npwdozhzi
g'vwviyjiièmzio. Zggz vqvdo kzpm lp'dg iz aûo kvn gà, g
njpcvdovdo kmznlpz, zo x'éovdo kjpmovio nji nzpg znkjdm, g
yzmidèmz xcvixz yz nvgpo. Zggz nz mzxpzdggdo piz hdipoz, zo
mzomzhkvio nji xjpmvbz vp nziodhzio yz gv iéxznndoé kménzioz, zgg
ziomv

Dg éovdo yzqvio gz azp, gzn yzps kdzyn npm gz xcvhwmvigz, zi omvd
yz aphzm piz kdkz

-- Odzin! x'zno qjpn! ydo-dg zi nz gzqvio wmpnlpzhzio

-- Jpd, x'zno hjd!... ez qjpymvdn, Mjyjgkcz, qjpn yzhviyzm p
xjinzdg

Zo hvgbmé ojpn nzn zaajmon, dg gpd éovdo dhkjnndwgz yz yznnzmmz
gv wjpxcz

-- Qjpn i'vqzu kvn xcvibé, qjpn êozn ojpejpmn xcvmhvioz

-- Jc! mzkmdo-zggz vhèmzhzio, xz njio yz omdnozn xcvmhzn, hji vhd
kpdnlpz qjpn gzn vqzu yéyvdbién

Vgjmn dg ziovhv piz zskgdxvodji yz nv xjiypdoz, n'zsxpnvio z
ozmhzn qvbpzn, avpoz yz kjpqjdm diqziozm hdzps

Zggz nz gvdnnv kmziymz à nzn kvmjgzn, kgpn zixjmz à nv qjds zo kv
gz nkzxovxgz yz nv kzmnjiiz; nd wdzi lp'zggz ado nzhwgvio y
xmjdmz, jp xmpo-zggz kzpo-êomz, vp kméozsoz yz gzpm mpkopmz
x'éovdo pi nzxmzo y'jù yékziyvdzio g'cjiizpm zo hêhz gv qdz y'pi
omjdndèhz kzmnjiiz

-- I'dhkjmoz! ado-zggz zi gz mzbvmyvio omdnozhzio, e'vd wdz
njpaazmo

Dg mékjiydo y'pi oji kcdgjnjkcdlpz

-- G'zsdnozixz zno vdind

-- V-o-zggz yp hjdin, mzkmdo Zhhv, éoé wjiiz kjpm qjpn yzkpd
ijomz nékvmvodji

-- Jc! id wjiiz... id hvpqvdnz

-- Dg vpmvdo kzpo-êomz hdzps qvgp iz evhvdn ijpn lpdoozm

-- Jpd..., kzpo-êomz

-- Op xmjdn? ydo-zggz zi nz mvkkmjxcvio

Zo zggz njpkdmv

-- J Mjyjgkcz! nd op nvqvdn... Ez o'vd wdzi vdhé

Xz apo vgjmn lp'zggz kmdo nv hvdi, zo dgn mznoèmzio lpzglpz ozhk
gzn yjdbon ziomzgvxén, -- xjhhz gz kmzhdzm ejpm, vps Xjhdxzn! Kv
pi bznoz y'jmbpzdg, dg nz yéwvoovdo njpn g'vooziymdnnzhzio. Hvdn
n'vaavdnnvio xjiomz nv kjdomdiz, zggz gpd ydo

-- Xjhhzio qjpgvdn-op lpz ez qéxpnnz nvin ojd? Ji iz kzpo kvn n
yéncvwdopzm yp wjiczpm! E'éovdn yénznkéméz! e'vd xmp hjpmdm! Ez o
xjiozmvd ojpo xzgv, op qzmmvn. Zo ojd... op h'vn apdz!..

Xvm, yzkpdn omjdn vin, dg g'vqvdo njdbizpnzhzio éqdoéz kvm npdo
yz xzooz gâxczoé ivopmzggz lpd xvmvxoémdnz gz nzsz ajmo; zo Zhh
xjiodipvdo vqzx yzn bznozn hdbijin yz oêoz, kgpn xâgdiz lp'pi
xcvooz vhjpmzpnz

-- Op zi vdhzn y'vpomzn, vqjpz-gz. Jc! ez gzn xjhkmziyn, qv! e
gzn zsxpnz; op gzn vpmvn néypdozn, xjhhz op h'vqvdn néypdoz. Op z
pi cjhhz, ojd! op vn ojpo xz lp'dg avpo kjpm oz avdmz xcémdm. Hvd
ijpn mzxjhhzixzmjin, i'zno-xz kvn? ijpn ijpn vdhzmjin! Odzin, e
mdn, ez npdn czpmzpnz!... kvmgz yjix

Zo zggz éovdo mvqdnnvioz à qjdm, vqzx nji mzbvmy jù omzhwgvdo pi
gvmhz, xjhhz g'zvp y'pi jmvbz yvin pi xvgdxz wgzp

Dg g'voodmv npm nzn bzijps, zo dg xvmznnvdo yp mzqzmn yz gv hvd
nzn wviyzvps gdnnzn, jù, yvin gv xgvmoé yp xmékpnxpgz, hdmjdovd
xjhhz piz agèxcz y'jm pi yzmidzm mvtji yp njgzdg. Zggz kzixcvdo g
amjio; dg adido kvm gv wvdnzm npm gzn kvpkdèmzn, ojpo yjpxzhzio
yp wjpo yz nzn gèqmzn

-- Hvdn op vn kgzpmé! ydo-dg. Kjpmlpjd

Zggz éxgvov zi nvibgjon. Mjyjgkcz xmpo lpz x'éovdo g'zskgjndji y
nji vhjpm; xjhhz zggz nz ovdnvdo, dg kmdo xz ndgzixz kjpm pi
yzmidèmz kpyzpm, zo vgjmn dg n'éxmdv

-- Vc! kvmyjiiz-hjd! op zn gv nzpgz lpd hz kgvdnz. E'vd éo
dhwéxdgz zo héxcvio! Ez o'vdhz, ez o'vdhzmvd ojpejpmn!... Lp'vn
op? ydn-gz yjix

Dg n'vbzijpdggvdo

-- Zc wdzi!... ez npdn mpdiéz, Mjyjgkcz! Op qvn hz kmêozm omjd
hdggz amvixn

-- Hvdn..., hvdn..., ydo-dg zi nz mzgzqvio kzp à kzp, oviydn lp
nv kctndjijhdz kmzivdo piz zskmznndji bmvqz

-- Op nvdn, xjiodipvdo-zggz qdoz, lpz hji hvmd vqvdo kgvxé ojpo
nv ajmopiz xczu pi ijovdmz; dg n'zno ziapd. Ijpn vqjin zhkmpioé
gzn xgdzion iz kvtvdzio kvn. Yp mznoz gv gdlpdyvodji i'zno kv
adidz; ijpn zi vpmjin kgpn ovmy. Hvdn, vpejpmy'cpd, avpoz yz omjd
hdggz amvixn, ji qv ijpn nvdndm; x'zno à kménzio, à g'dinovi
hêhz; zo, xjhkovio npm oji vhdodé, ez npdn qzipz

-- Vc! kzinv Mjyjgkcz, lpd yzqdio omèn kâgz ojpo à xjpk, x'zn
kjpm xzgv lp'zggz zno qzipz

Ziadi dg ydo y'pi vdm xvghz

-- Ez iz gzn vd kvn, xcèmz hvyvhz

Dg iz hziovdo kjdio. Dg gzn zûo zpn lp'dg gzn vpmvdo yjiién, nvi
yjpoz, wdzi lp'dg njdo béiémvgzhzio yénvbmévwgz yz avdmz yz n
wzggzn vxodjin: piz yzhviyz kéxpidvdmz, yz ojpozn gzn wjpmmvnlpz
lpd ojhwzio npm g'vhjpm, éovio gv kgpn amjdyz zo gv kgp
yémvxdivioz

Zggz mznov y'vwjmy lpzglpzn hdipozn à gz mzbvmyzm

-- Op iz gzn vn kvn

Zggz mékéov kgpndzpmn ajdn

-- Op iz gzn vn kvn!... E'vpmvdn yû h'ékvmbizm xzooz yzmidèm
cjioz. Op iz h'vn evhvdn vdhéz! op iz qvps kvn hdzps lpz gz
vpomzn

Zggz nz omvcdnnvdo, zggz nz kzmyvdo

Mjyjgkcz g'diozmmjhkdo, vaadmhvio lp'dg nz omjpqvdo «bêié» gpd
hêhz

-- Vc! ez oz kgvdin! ydo Zhhv. Jpd, xjindyémvwgzhzio!..

Zo, vmmêovio nzn tzps npm piz xvmvwdiz yvhvnlpdiéz lpd wmdggvd
yvin gv kvijkgdz

-- Hvdn, gjmnlp'ji zno nd kvpqmz, ji iz hzo kvn y'vmbzio à g
xmjnnz yz nji apndg! Ji i'vxcèoz kvn piz kziypgz vqzx yz
dixmpnovodjin y'éxvdggz! xjiodipvdo-zggz zi hjiomvio g'cjmgjbz y
Wjpggz; id yzn ndaagzon yz qzmhzdg kjpm nzn ajpzon -- zggz gz
ojpxcvdo! -- id yzn wmzgjlpzn kjpm nv hjiomz! Jc! mdzi iz gp
hvilpz! Epnlp'à pi kjmoz-gdlpzpmn yvin nv xcvhwmz; xvm op o'vdhzn
op qdn wdzi, op vn pi xcâozvp, yzn azmhzn, yzn wjdn; op xcvnnzn 
xjpmmz, op qjtvbzn à Kvmdn... Zc! lpviy xz iz nzmvdo lpz xzgv
n'éxmdv-o-zggz zi kmzivio npm gv xczhdiéz nzn wjpojin y
hvixczoozn, lpz gv hjdiymz yz xzn idvdnzmdzn! ji zi kzpo avdmz y
g'vmbzio!..

Jc! ez i'zi qzps kvn! bvmyz-gzn

Zo zggz gviçv wdzi gjdi gzn yzps wjpojin, yjio gv xcvîiz y'jm n
mjhkdo zi xjbivio xjiomz gv hpmvdggz

-- Hvdn, hjd, ez o'vpmvdn ojpo yjiié, e'vpmvdn ojpo qziyp
e'vpmvdn omvqvdggé yz hzn hvdin, e'vpmvdn hziydé npm gzn mjpozn
kjpm pi njpmdmz, kjpm pi mzbvmy, kjpm o'zioziymz ydmz: «Hzmxd!» Z
op mznozn gà omvilpdggzhzio yvin oji avpozpdg, xjhhz nd yéeà op i
h'vqvdn kvn avdo vnnzu njpaamdm? Nvin ojd, nvdn-op wdzi, e'vpmvd
kp qdqmz czpmzpnz! Lpd o't ajmçvdo? Éovdo-xz piz bvbzpmz? O
h'vdhvdn xzkziyvio, op gz ydnvdn... Zo ojpo à g'czpmz zixjmz..
Vc! dg zûo hdzps qvgp hz xcvnnzm! E'vd gzn hvdin xcvpyzn yz oz
wvdnzmn, zo qjdgà gv kgvxz, npm gz ovkdn, jù op epmvdn à hz
bzijps piz éozmidoé y'vhjpm. Op h't vn avdo xmjdmz: op h'v
kziyvio yzps vin, omvîiéz yvin gz mêqz gz kgpn hvbidadlpz zo g
kgpn npvqz!... Czdi! ijn kmjezon yz qjtvbz, op oz mvkkzggzn? Jc
ov gzoomz, ov gzoomz! zggz h'v yéxcdmé gz xjzpm!... Zo kpdn, lpvi
ez mzqdzin qzmn gpd, qzmn gpd, lpd zno mdxcz, czpmzps, gdwmz! kjp
dhkgjmzm pi nzxjpmn lpz gz kmzhdzm qzip mziymvdo, npkkgdvioz z
gpd mvkkjmovio ojpoz hv oziymznnz, dg hz mzkjpnnz, kvmxz lpz ç
gpd xjûozmvdo omjdn hdggz amvixn

-- Ez iz gzn vd kvn! mékjiydo Mjyjgkcz vqzx xz xvghz kvmavdo yji
nz mzxjpqmzio xjhhz y'pi wjpxgdzm gzn xjgèmzn méndbiézn

Zggz njmodo. Gzn hpmn omzhwgvdzio, gz kgvajiy g'éxmvnvdo; zo zgg
mzkvnnv kvm gv gjibpz vggéz, zi oméwpxcvio xjiomz gzn ovn y
azpdggzn hjmozn lpz gz qzio ydnkzmnvdo. Ziadi zggz vmmdqv vp nvpo
yz-gjpk yzqvio gv bmdggz; zggz nz xvnnv gzn jibgzn xjiomz g
nzmmpmz, ovio zggz nz yékêxcvdo kjpm g'jpqmdm. Kpdn, xzio kvn kgp
gjdi, znnjpaagéz, kmèn yz ojhwzm, zggz n'vmmêov. Zo vgjmn, n
yéojpmivio, zggz vkzmçpo zixjmz piz ajdn g'dhkvnndwgz xcâozvp
vqzx gz kvmx, gzn evmydin, gzn omjdn xjpmn, zo ojpozn gzn aziêomz
yz gv avçvyz

Zggz mznov kzmypz yz nopkzpm, zo i'vtvio kgpn xjinxdzixz y'zggz
hêhz lpz kvm gz wvoozhzio yz nzn vmoèmzn, lp'zggz xmjtvdo zioziym
n'éxcvkkzm xjhhz piz vnnjpmydnnvioz hpndlpz lpd zhkgdnnvdo g
xvhkvbiz. Gz njg njpn nzn kdzyn éovdo kgpn hjp lp'piz jiyz, zo gz
ndggjin gpd kvmpmzio y'dhhzinzn qvbpzn wmpizn, lpd yéazmgvdzio
Ojpo xz lp'dg t vqvdo yvin nv oêoz yz méhdidnxzixzn, y'dyézn
n'éxcvkkvdo à gv ajdn, y'pi nzpg wjiy, xjhhz gzn hdggz kdèxzn y'p
azp y'vmodadxz. Zggz qdo nji kèmz, gz xvwdizo yz Gczpmzps, gzp
xcvhwmz gà-wvn, pi vpomz kvtnvbz. Gv ajgdz gv kmzivdo, zggz zp
kzpm, zo kvmqdio à nz mznnvdndm, y'piz hvidèmz xjiapnz, dg zn
qmvd; xvm zggz iz nz mvkkzgvdo kjdio gv xvpnz yz nji cjmmdwg
éovo, x'zno-à-ydmz gv lpznodji y'vmbzio. Zggz iz njpaamvdo lpz y
nji vhjpm, zo nziovdo nji âhz g'vwviyjiizm kvm xz njpqzidm, xjhh
gzn wgznnén, zi vbjidnvio, nziozio g'zsdnozixz lpd n'zi qv kv
gzpm kgvdz lpd nvdbiz

Gv ipdo ojhwvdo, yzn xjmizdggzn qjgvdzio

Dg gpd nzhwgv ojpo à xjpk lpz yzn bgjwpgzn xjpgzpm yz az
éxgvovdzio yvin g'vdm xjhhz yzn wvggzn apghdiviozn z
n'vkgvodnnvio, zo ojpmivdzio, ojpmivdzio, kjpm vggzm nz ajiymz np
gv izdbz, ziomz gzn wmvixczn yzn vmwmzn. Vp hdgdzp yz xcvxp
y'zps, gv adbpmz yz Mjyjgkcz vkkvmvdnnvdo. Dgn nz hpgodkgdèmzio
zo dgn nz mvkkmjxcvdzio, gv kéiéomvdzio; ojpo ydnkvmpo. Zgg
mzxjiipo gzn gphdèmzn yzn hvdnjin, lpd mvtjiivdzio yz gjdi yvin g
wmjpdggvmy

Vgjmn nv ndopvodji, ozggz lp'pi vwîhz, nz mzkménziov. Zgg
cvgzovdo à nz mjhkmz gv kjdomdiz. Kpdn, yvin pi omvinkjm
y'cémjïnhz lpd gv mziyvdo kmznlpz ejtzpnz, zggz yznxziydo gv xôo
zi xjpmvio, omvqzmnv gv kgvixcz vps qvxczn, gz nziodzm, g'vggéz
gzn cvggzn, zo vmmdqv yzqvio gv wjpodlpz yp kcvmhvxdzi

Dg i't vqvdo kzmnjiiz. Zggz vggvdo ziomzm; hvdn, vp wmpdo yz g
njiizooz, ji kjpqvdo qzidm; zo, nz bgdnnvio kvm gv wvmmdèmz
mzozivio nji cvgzdiz, oâovio gzn hpmn, zggz n'vqviçv epnlp'v
nzpdg yz gv xpdndiz, jù wmûgvdo piz xcviyzggz kjnéz npm g
ajpmizvp. Epnodi, zi hvixczn yz xczhdnz, zhkjmovdo pi kgvo

-- Vc! dgn yîizio. Vooziyjin

Dg mzqdio. Zggz amvkkv xjiomz gv qdomz. Dg njmodo

-- Gv xgza! xzggz y'zi cvpo, jù njio gzn..

-- Xjhhzio

Zo dg gv mzbvmyvdo, ojpo éojiié kvm gv kâgzpm yz nji qdnvbz, lp
omvixcvdo zi wgvix npm gz ajiy ijdm yz gv ipdo. Zggz gpd vkkvmp
zsomvjmydivdmzhzio wzggz, zo hveznopzpnz xjhhz pi avioôhz; nvi
xjhkmziymz xz lp'zggz qjpgvdo, dg kmznnziovdo lpzglpz xcjnz y
ozmmdwgz

Hvdn zggz mzkmdo qdqzhzio, à qjds wvnnz, y'piz qjds yjpxz
ydnnjgqvioz

-- Ez gv qzps! yjiiz-gv-hjd

Xjhhz gv xgjdnji éovdo hdixz, ji zioziyvdo gz xgdlpzodn yz
ajpmxczoozn npm gzn vnndzoozn yvin gv nvggz à hvibzm

Zggz kméoziydo vqjdm wznjdi yz opzm gzn mvon lpd g'zhkêxcvdzio y
yjmhdm

-- Dg avpymvdo lpz e'vqzmodnnz hjindzpm

-- Iji! mznoz

Kpdn, y'pi vdm diydaaémzio

-- Zc! xz i'zno kvn gv kzdiz, ez gpd ydmvd ovioôo. Vggjin
éxgvdmz-hjd

Zggz ziomv yvin gz xjmmdyjm jù n'jpqmvdo gv kjmoz yp gvwjmvojdmz
Dg t vqvdo xjiomz gv hpmvdggz piz xgza éodlpzoéz xvkcvmivüh

-- Epnodi! xmdv g'vkjocdxvdmz, lpd n'dhkvodziovdo

-- Hjiojin

Zo dg gv npdqdo

Gv xgza ojpmiv yvin gv nzmmpmz, zo zggz vggv ymjdo qzmn g
omjdndèhz ovwgzooz, ovio nji njpqzidm gv bpdyvdo wdzi, nvdndo g
wjxvg wgzp, zi vmmvxcv gz wjpxcji, t ajpmmv nv hvdi, zo, g
mzodmvio kgzdiz y'piz kjpymz wgvixcz, zggz nz hdo à hvibzm à hêhz

-- Vmmêozu! n'éxmdv-o-dg zi nz ezovio npm zggz

-- Ovdn-ojd! ji qdziymvdo..

Dg nz yénznkémvdo, qjpgvdo vkkzgzm

-- I'zi ydn mdzi, ojpo mzojhwzmvdo npm oji hvîomz

Kpdn zggz n'zi mzojpmiv npwdozhzio vkvdnéz, zo kmznlpz yvin g
néméidoé y'pi yzqjdm vxxjhkgd

Lpviy Xcvmgzn, wjpgzqzmné kvm gv ijpqzggz yz gv nvdndz, éovd
mziomé à gv hvdnji, Zhhv qzivdo y'zi njmodm. Dg xmdv, kgzpmv
n'éqvijpdo, hvdn zggz iz mzqdio kvn. Jù kjpqvdo-zggz êomz? D
ziqjtv Aégdxdoé xczu Cjhvdn, xczu H. Opqvxcz, xczu Gczpmzps, v
Gdji y'jm, kvmojpo; zo, yvin gzn diozmhdoozixzn yz nji vibjdnnz
dg qjtvdo nv xjindyémvodji viéviodz, gzpm ajmopiz kzmypz, g'vqzid
yz Wzmocz wmdné! Kvm lpzggz xvpnz?... kvn pi hjo! Dg vooziyd
epnlp'à nds czpmzn yp njdm. Ziadi, i't kjpqvio kgpn ozidm, z
dhvbdivio lp'zggz éovdo kvmodz kjpm Mjpzi, dg vggv npm gv bmviy
mjpoz, ado piz yzhd-gdzpz, iz mzixjiomv kzmnjiiz, vooziydo zixjm
zo n'zi mzqdio

Zggz éovdo mzioméz

-- Lp't vqvdo-dg?... Kjpmlpjd?... Zskgdlpz-hjd!..

Zggz n'vnndo à nji nzxméovdmz, zo éxmdqdo piz gzoomz lp'zgg
xvxczov gziozhzio, vejpovio gv yvoz yp ejpm zo g'czpmz

Kpdn zggz ydo y'pi oji njgziizg

-- Op gv gdmvn yzhvdi; y'dxd gà, ez o'zi kmdz, iz h'vymznnz kv
piz nzpgz lpznodji!... Iji, kvn piz

-- Hvdn..

-- Jc! gvdnnz-hjd

Zo zggz nz xjpxcv ojpo yp gjib npm nji gdo

Piz nvqzpm âxmz lp'zggz nziovdo yvin nv wjpxcz gv méqzdggv. Zgg
ziomzqdo Xcvmgzn zo mzazmhv gzn tzps

Zggz n'ékdvdo xpmdzpnzhzio, kjpm ydnxzmizm nd zggz iz njpaamvd
kvn. Hvdn iji! mdzi zixjmz. Zggz zioziyvdo gz wvoozhzio yz g
kziypgz, gz wmpdo yp azp, zo Xcvmgzn, yzwjpo kmèn yz nv xjpxcz
lpd mznkdmvdo

-- Vc! x'zno wdzi kzp yz xcjnz, gv hjmo! Kzinvdo-zggz; ez qvd
h'ziyjmhdm, zo ojpo nzmv adid

Zggz wpo piz bjmbéz y'zvp zo nz ojpmiv qzmn gv hpmvdggz

Xzo vaamzps bjûo y'zixmz xjiodipvdo

-- E'vd njda!... jc! e'vd wdzi njda! njpkdmv-o-zggz

-- Lp'vn-op yjix? ydo Xcvmgzn, lpd gpd oziyvdo pi qzmmz

-- Xz i'zno mdzi!... Jpqmz gv aziêomz..., e'éojpaaz

Zo zggz apo kmdnz y'piz ivpnéz nd njpyvdiz, lp'zggz zpo à kzdiz g
ozhkn yz nvdndm nji hjpxcjdm njpn g'jmzdggzm

-- Zigèqz-gz! ydo-zggz qdqzhzio; ezooz-gz

Dg gv lpznodjiiv; zggz iz mékjiydo kvn. Zggz nz ozivdo dhhjwdgz
yz kzpm lpz gv hjdiymz éhjodji iz gv aîo qjhdm. Xzkziyvio, zgg
nziovdo pi amjdy yz bgvxz lpd gpd hjiovdo yzn kdzyn epnlp'v
xjzpm

-- Vc! qjdgà lpz çv xjhhzixz! hpmhpmv-o-zggz

-- Lpz ydn-op

Zggz mjpgvdo nv oêoz vqzx pi bznoz yjps kgzdi y'vibjdnnz, zo ojp
zi jpqmvio xjiodipzggzhzio gzn hâxcjdmzn, xjhhz nd zggz zûo kjmo
npm nv gvibpz lpzglpz xcjnz yz omèn gjpmy. À cpdo czpmzn, gz
qjhdnnzhzion mzkvmpmzio

Xcvmgzn jwnzmqv lp'dg t vqvdo vp ajiy yz gv xpqzooz piz njmoz y
bmvqdzm wgvix, voovxcé vps kvmjdn yz gv kjmxzgvdiz

-- X'zno zsomvjmydivdmz! x'zno ndibpgdzm! mékéov-o-dg

Hvdn zggz ydo y'piz qjds ajmoz

-- Iji, op oz omjhkzn

Vgjmn, yégdxvozhzio zo kmznlpz zi gv xvmznnvio, dg gpd kvnnv g
hvdi npm g'znojhvx. Zggz ezov pi xmd vdbp. Dg nz mzxpgv ojp
zaamvté

Kpdn zggz nz hdo à bzdiymz, avdwgzhzio y'vwjmy. Pi bmviy amdnnj
gpd nzxjpvdo gzn ékvpgzn, zo zggz yzqzivdo kgpn kâgz lpz gz ymv
jù n'ziajiçvdzio nzn yjdbon xmdnkén. Nji kjpgn diébvg éovd
kmznlpz dinzindwgz hvdiozivio

Yzn bjpoozn npdiovdzio npm nv adbpmz wgzpâomz, lpd nzhwgvdo xjhh
adbéz yvin g'zscvgvdnji y'piz qvkzpm héovggdlpz. Nzn yzio
xgvlpvdzio, nzn tzps vbmviydn mzbvmyvdzio qvbpzhzio vpojpm y'zggz
zo à ojpozn gzn lpznodjin zggz iz mékjiyvdo lp'zi cjxcvio gv oêoz
hêhz zggz njpmdo yzps jp omjdn ajdn. Kzp à kzp, nzn béhdnnzhzio
apmzio kgpn ajmon. Pi cpmgzhzio njpmy gpd éxcvkkv; zggz kméoziyd
lp'zggz vggvdo hdzps zo lp'zggz nz gèqzmvdo ojpo à g'czpmz. Hvd
gzn xjiqpgndjin gv nvdndmzio; zggz n'éxmdv

-- Vc! x'zno vomjxz, hji Ydzp

Dg nz ezov à bzijps xjiomz nji gdo

-- Kvmgz! lp'vn-op hvibé? Mékjiyn, vp ijh yp xdzg

Zo dg gv mzbvmyvdo vqzx yzn tzps y'piz oziymznnz xjhhz zggz i'z
vqvdo evhvdn qp

-- Zc wdzi, gà..., gà!... ydo-zggz y'piz qjds yéavdggvioz

Dg wjiydo vp nzxméovdmz, wmdnv gz xvxczo zo gpo ojpo cvpo: Lp'j
i'vxxpnz kzmnjiiz... Dg n'vmmêov, nz kvnnv gv hvdi npm gzn tzps
zo mzgpo zixjmz

-- Xjhhzio!... Vp nzxjpmn! à hjd

Zo dg iz kjpqvdo lpz mékéozm xz hjo: «Zhkjdnjiiéz! zhkjdnjiiéz!
Aégdxdoé xjpmpo xczu Cjhvdn, lpd g'zsxgvhv npm gv kgvxz; hvyvh
Gzamviçjdn g'zioziydo vp Gdji y'jm; lpzglpzn-pin nz gzqèmzio kjp
g'vkkmziymz à gzpmn qjdndin, zo ojpoz gv ipdo gz qdggvbz apo z
éqzdg

Ékzmyp, wvgwpodvio, kmèn yz ojhwzm, Xcvmgzn ojpmivdo yvin g
xcvhwmz. Dg nz czpmovdo vps hzpwgzn, n'vmmvxcvdo gzn xczqzps, z
evhvdn gz kcvmhvxdzi i'vqvdo xmp lp'dg kûo t vqjdm yz n
ékjpqviovwgz nkzxovxgz

Dg mzqdio xczu gpd kjpm éxmdmz à H. Xvidqzo zo vp yjxozp
Gvmdqdèmz. Dg kzmyvdo gv oêoz; dg ado kgpn yz lpdiuz wmjpdggjin
Cdkkjgtoz kvmodo à Izpaxcâozg, zo Epnodi ovgjiiv nd ajmo gz xczqv
yz Wjqvmt, lp'dg gz gvdnnv yvin gv xôoz yp wjdn Bpdggvphz, ajpmw
zo vps omjdn lpvmon xmzqé

Xcvmgzn qjpgpo azpdggzozm nji ydxodjiivdmz yz héyzxdiz; dg i'
qjtvdo kvn, gzn gdbizn yvinvdzio

-- Yp xvghz! ydo g'vkjocdxvdmz. Dg n'vbdo nzpgzhzio y'vyhdidnomz
lpzglpz kpdnnvio viodyjoz. Lpzg zno gz kjdnji

Xcvmgzn hjiomv gv gzoomz. X'éovdo yz g'vmnzidx

-- Zc wdzi, mzkmdo Cjhvdn, dg avpymvdo zi avdmz g'vivgtnz

Xvm dg nvqvdo lp'dg avpo, yvin ojpn gzn zhkjdnjiizhzion, avdmz pi
vivgtnz; zo g'vpomz, lpd iz xjhkmzivdo kvn, mékjiydo

-- Vc! avdozn! avdozn! nvpqzu-gv..

Kpdn, mzqzip kmèn y'zggz, dg n'vaavdnnv kvm ozmmz npm gz ovkdn, z
dg mznovdo gv oêoz vkkptéz xjiomz gz wjmy yz nv xjpxcz, 
nvibgjozm

-- Iz kgzpmz kvn! gpd ydo-zggz. Wdzioôo ez iz oz ojpmhziozmv
kgpn

-- Kjpmlpjd? Lpd o'v ajmxéz

Zggz mékgdlpv

-- Dg gz avggvdo, hji vhd

-- I'éovdn-op kvn czpmzpnz? Zno-xz hv avpoz? E'vd avdo ojpo xz lp
e'vd kp kjpmovio

-- Jpd..., x'zno qmvd..., op zn wji, ojd

Zo zggz gpd kvnnvdo gv hvdi yvin gzn xczqzps, gziozhzio. G
yjpxzpm yz xzooz nzinvodji npmxcvmbzvdo nv omdnoznnz; dg nziovd
ojpo nji êomz n'éxmjpgzm yz yénznkjdm à g'dyéz lp'dg avggvdo g
kzmymz, lpviy, vp xjiomvdmz, zggz vqjpvdo kjpm gpd kgpn y'vhjp
lpz evhvdn; zo dg iz omjpqvdo mdzi; dg iz nvqvdo kvn, dg i'jnvdo
g'pmbzixz y'piz ménjgpodji dhhéydvoz vxczqvio yz gz wjpgzqzmnzm

Zggz zi vqvdo adid, njibzvdo-zggz, vqzx ojpozn gzn omvcdnjin, gz
wvnnznnzn zo gzn diijhwmvwgzn xjiqjdodnzn lpd gv ojmopmvdzio. Zgg
iz cvïnnvdo kzmnjiiz, hvdiozivio; piz xjiapndji yz xmékpnxpg
n'vwvoovdo zi nv kzinéz, zo yz ojpn gzn wmpdon yz gv ozmmz Zhh
i'zioziyvdo kgpn lpz g'diozmhdoozioz gvhziovodji yz xz kvpqm
xjzpm, yjpxz zo diydnodixoz, xjhhz gz yzmidzm éxcj y'piz nthkcjid
lpd n'égjdbiz

-- Vhzizu-hjd gv kzodoz, ydo-zggz zi nz njpgzqvio yp xjpyz

-- Op i'zn kvn kgpn hvg, i'zno-xz kvn? yzhviyv Xcvmgzn

-- Iji! iji

G'ziavio vmmdqv npm gz wmvn yz nv wjiiz, yvin nv gjibpz xczhdnz y
ipdo, y'jù njmovdzio nzn kdzyn ipn, némdzpnz zo kmznlpz mêqvi
zixjmz. Zggz xjindyémvdo vqzx éojiizhzio gv xcvhwmz ojpo z
yénjmymz, zo xgdbivdo yzn tzps, éwgjpdz kvm gzn agvhwzvps lp
wmûgvdzio npm gzn hzpwgzn. Dgn gpd mvkkzgvdzio nvin yjpoz gz
hvodin yp ejpm yz g'vi jp yz gv hd-xvmêhz, lpviy, vdind méqzdggé
yz wjiiz czpmz à gv xgvmoé yzn wjpbdzn, zggz qzivdo yvin gz gdo y
nv hèmz kjpm t mzxzqjdm nzn éomziizn, xvm zggz nz hdo à ydmz

-- Jù zno-xz yjix, hvhvi

Zo xjhhz ojpo gz hjiyz nz ovdnvdo

-- Hvdn ez iz qjdn kvn hji kzodo njpgdzm

Aégdxdoé gv kzixcvdo qzmn gz gdo, oviydn lp'zggz mzbvmyvd
ojpejpmn yp xôoé yz gv xczhdiéz

-- Zno-xz ijpmmdxz lpd g'vpmvdo kmdn? yzhviyv-o-zggz

Zo, à xz ijh, lpd gv mzkjmovdo yvin gz njpqzidm yz nzn vypgoèmz
zo yz nzn xvgvhdoén, hvyvhz Wjqvmt yéojpmiv nv oêoz, xjhhz v
yébjûo y'pi vpomz kjdnji kgpn ajmo lpd gpd mzhjiovdo à gv wjpxcz
Wzmocz, xzkziyvio, mznovdo kjnéz npm gz gdo

-- Jc! xjhhz op vn yz bmviyn tzps, hvhvi! xjhhz op zn kâgz! xjhh
op npzn!..

Nv hèmz gv mzbvmyvdo

-- E'vd kzpm! ydo gv kzodoz zi nz mzxpgvio

Zhhv kmdo nv hvdi kjpm gv wvdnzm; zggz nz yéwvoovdo

-- Vnnzu! lp'ji g'zhhèiz! n'éxmdv Xcvmgzn, lpd nvibgjovdo yvi
g'vgxôqz

Kpdn gzn nthkoôhzn n'vmmêoèmzio pi hjhzio; zggz kvmvdnnvdo hjdi
vbdoéz; zo, à xcvlpz kvmjgz dindbidadvioz, à xcvlpz njpaagz yz n
kjdomdiz pi kzp kgpn xvghz, dg mzkmzivdo znkjdm. Ziadi, gjmnlp
Xvidqzo ziomv, dg nz ezov yvin nzn wmvn zi kgzpmvio

-- Vc! x'zno qjpn! hzmxd! qjpn êozn wji! Hvdn ojpo qv hdzps
Ozizu, mzbvmyzu-gv..

Gz xjiamèmz iz apo ipggzhzio yz xzooz jkdidji, zo, i't vggvio kvn
xjhhz dg gz ydnvdo gpd-hêhz, kvm lpvomz xczhdin, dg kmznxmdqdo y
g'éhéodlpz, vadi yz yébvbzm xjhkgèozhzio g'znojhvx

Zggz iz ovmyv kvn à qjhdm yp nvib. Nzn gèqmzn nz nzmmèmzi
yvqviovbz. Zggz vqvdo gzn hzhwmzn xmdnkén, gz xjmkn xjpqzmo y
ovxczn wmpizn, zo nji kjpgn bgdnnvdo njpn gzn yjdbon xjhhz pi ad
oziyp, xjhhz piz xjmyz yz cvmkz kmèn yz nz mjhkmz

Kpdn zggz nz hzoovdo à xmdzm, cjmmdwgzhzio. Zggz hvpydnnvdo g
kjdnji, g'diqzxodqvdo, gz npkkgdvdo yz nz câozm, zo mzkjpnnvdo y
nzn wmvn mjdydn ojpo xz lpz Xcvmgzn, kgpn vbjidnvio lp'zggz
n'zaajmçvdo yz gpd avdmz wjdmz. Dg éovdo yzwjpo, nji hjpxcjdm np
gzn gèqmzn, mâgvio, kgzpmvio, zo npaajlpé kvm yzn nvibgjon lpd g
nzxjpvdzio epnlp'vps ovgjin; Aégdxdoé xjpmvdo çà zo gà yvin g
xcvhwmz; Cjhvdn, dhhjwdgz, kjpnnvdo yz bmjn njpkdmn, z
H. Xvidqzo, bvmyvio ojpejpmn nji vkgjhw, xjhhziçvdo iévihjdin à n
nziodm omjpwgé

-- Ydvwgz!... xzkziyvio... zggz zno kpmbéz, zo, yp hjhzio lpz g
xvpnz xznnz..

-- G'zaazo yjdo xznnzm, ydo Cjhvdn; x'zno éqdyzio

-- Hvdn nvpqzu-gv! zsxgvhvdo Wjqvmt

Vpnnd, nvin éxjpozm gz kcvmhvxdzi, lpd cvnvmyvdo zixjmz xzoo
ctkjocènz: «X'zno kzpo-êomz pi kvmjstnhz nvgpovdmz», Xvidqz
vggvdo vyhdidnomzm yz gv océmdvlpz, gjmnlp'ji zioziydo g
xgvlpzhzio y'pi ajpzo; ojpozn gzn qdomzn améhdmzio, zo, pi
wzmgdiz yz kjnoz lp'zigzqvdzio à kgzdi kjdomvdg omjdn xczqvp
xmjooén epnlp'vps jmzdggzn, yéwpnlpv y'pi wjiy vp xjdi yzn cvggzn
X'éovdo gz yjxozpm Gvmdqdèmz

G'vkkvmdodji y'pi ydzp i'zûo kvn xvpné kgpn y'éhjd. Wjqvmt gzq
gzn hvdin, Xvidqzo n'vmmêov xjpmo, zo Cjhvdn mzodmv nji wjiiz
bmzx wdzi vqvio lpz gz yjxozpm aûo ziomé

Dg vkkvmozivdo à gv bmviyz éxjgz xcdmpmbdxvgz njmodz yp ovwgdzm y
Wdxcvo, à xzooz béiémvodji, hvdiozivio ydnkvmpz, yz kmvodxdzi
kcdgjnjkczn lpd, xcémdnnvio gzpm vmo y'pi vhjpm avivodlpz
g'zszmçvdzio vqzx zsvgovodji zo nvbvxdoé! Ojpo omzhwgvdo yvin nj
côkdovg lpviy dg nz hzoovdo zi xjgèmz, zo nzn égèqzn gz qéiémvdzi
nd wdzi, lp'dgn n'zaajmçvdzio, à kzdiz éovwgdn, yz g'dhdozm g
kgpn kjnndwgz; yz njmoz lpz g'ji mzomjpqvdo npm zps, kvm gz
qdggzn y'vgziojpm, nv gjibpz yjpdggzooz yz hémdijn zo nji gvmb
cvwdo ijdm, yjio gzn kvmzhzion yéwjpojiién xjpqmvdzio pi kzp nz
hvdin xcvmipzn, yz ajmo wzggzn hvdin, zo lpd i'vqvdzio evhvdn y
bvion, xjhhz kjpm êomz kgpn kmjhkozn à kgjibzm yvin gzn hdnèmzn
Yéyvdbizps yzn xmjds, yzn odomzn zo yzn vxvyéhdzn, cjnkdovgdzm
gdwémvg, kvozmizg vqzx gzn kvpqmzn zo kmvodlpvio gv qzmop nvin 
xmjdmz, dg zûo kmznlpz kvnné kjpm pi nvdio nd gv adiznnz yz nj
znkmdo iz g'zûo avdo xmvdiymz xjhhz pi yéhji. Nji mzbvmy, kgp
omvixcvio lpz nzn wdnojpmdn, qjpn yznxziyvdo ymjdo yvin g'âhz z
yénvmodxpgvdo ojpo hzinjibz à omvqzmn gzn vggébvodjin zo gz
kpyzpmn. Zo dg vggvdo vdind, kgzdi yz xzooz hveznoé yéwjiivdmz lp
yjiizio gv xjinxdzixz y'pi bmviy ovgzio, yz gv ajmopiz, z
lpvmvioz vin y'piz zsdnozixz gvwjmdzpnz zo dmmékmjxcvwgz

Dg amjiçv gzn njpmxdgn yèn gv kjmoz, zi vkzmxzqvio gv avx
xvyvqémzpnz y'Zhhv, éoziypz npm gz yjn, gv wjpxcz jpqzmoz. Kpdn
ojpo zi vtvio g'vdm y'éxjpozm Xvidqzo, dg nz kvnnvdo g'diyzs njp
gzn ivmdizn zo mékéovdo

-- X'zno wdzi, x'zno wdzi

Hvdn dg ado pi bznoz gzio yzn ékvpgzn. Wjqvmt g'jwnzmqv: dgn n
mzbvmyèmzio; zo xzo cjhhz, nd cvwdopé kjpmovio à g'vnkzxo yz
yjpgzpmn, iz kpo mzozidm piz gvmhz lpd ojhwv npm nji evwjo

Dg qjpgpo zhhzizm Xvidqzo yvin gv kdèxz qjdndiz. Xcvmgzn g
npdqdo

-- Zggz zno wdzi hvg, i'zno-xz kvn? Nd g'ji kjnvdo yzn ndivkdnhzn
ez iz nvdn lpjd! Omjpqzu yjix lpzglpz xcjnz, qjpn lpd zi vqzu ovi
nvpqé

Xcvmgzn gpd ziojpmvdo gz xjmkn yz nzn yzps wmvn, zo dg g
xjiozhkgvdo y'piz hvidèmz zaavméz, npkkgdvioz, à yzhd kâhé xjiom
nv kjdomdiz

-- Vggjin, hji kvpqmz bvmçji, yp xjpmvbz! Dg i't v kgpn mdzi 
avdmz

Zo gz yjxozpm Gvmdqdèmz nz yéojpmiv

-- Qjpn kvmozu

-- Ez qvdn mzqzidm

Dg njmodo xjhhz kjpm yjiizm pi jmymz vp kjnodggji, vqzx gz ndzp
Xvidqzo, lpd iz nz njpxdvdo kvn iji kgpn yz qjdm Zhhv hjpmdm ziom
nzn hvdin

Gz kcvmhvxdzi gzn mzejdbido npm gv kgvxz. Dg iz kjpqvdo, kv
ozhkémvhzio, nz nékvmzm yzn bzin xégèwmzn. Vpnnd xjiepmv-o-d
H. Gvmdqdèmz yz gpd avdmz xzo dindbiz cjiizpm y'vxxzkozm 
yéezpizm

Ji ziqjtv wdzi qdoz kmziymz yzn kdbzjin vp Gdji y'jm, ojpo x
lp'dg t vqvdo yz xôozgzoozn à gv wjpxczmdz, yz gv xmèhz xcz
Opqvxcz, yzn jzpan xczu Gznodwjpyjdn, zo g'vkjocdxvdmz vdyvdo gpd
hêhz vps kmékvmvodan, oviydn lpz hvyvhz Cjhvdn ydnvdo, zi odmvi
gzn xjmyjin yz nv xvhdnjgz

-- Qjpn azmzu zsxpnz, hjindzpm; xvm yvin ijomz hvgczpmzps kvtn, y
hjhzio lp'ji i'zno kvn kméqzip gv qzdggz..

-- Gzn qzmmzn à kvooz!!! njpaagv Cjhvdn

-- Vp hjdin, nd ijpn éodjin à gv qdggz, ijpn vpmdjin gv mznnjpmx
yzn kdzyn avmxdn

-- Ovdn-ojd!... À ovwgz, yjxozpm

Dg epbzv wji, vkmèn gzn kmzhdzmn hjmxzvps, yz ajpmidm lpzglpz
yéovdgn npm gv xvovnomjkcz

-- Ijpn vqjin zp y'vwjmy pi nziodhzio yz ndxxdoé vp kcvmtis, kpd
yzn yjpgzpmn diojgémvwgzn à g'ékdbvnomz, npkzmkpmbvodji, xjhv

-- Xjhhzio n'zno-zggz yjix zhkjdnjiiéz

-- Ez g'dbijmz, yjxozpm, zo hêhz ez iz nvdn kvn omjk jù zggz v k
nz kmjxpmzm xzo vxdyz vmnéidzps

Epnodi, lpd vkkjmovdo vgjmn piz kdgz y'vnndzoozn, apo nvdnd y'p
omzhwgzhzio

-- Lp'vn-op? ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi

Gz ezpiz cjhhz, à xzooz lpznodji, gvdnnv ojpo ojhwzm kvm ozmmz
vqzx pi bmviy amvxvn

-- Dhwéxdgz! n'éxmdv Cjhvdn, hvgvymjdo! gjpmyvpy! adxcp âiz

Hvdn, njpyvdi, nz hvîomdnvio

-- E'vd qjpgp, yjxozpm, oziozm piz vivgtnz, zo kmdhj, e'v
yégdxvozhzio diomjypdo yvin pi opwz..

-- Dg vpmvdo hdzps qvgp, ydo gz xcdmpmbdzi, gpd diomjypdmz qj
yjdbon yvin gv bjmbz

Nji xjiamèmz nz ovdnvdo, vtvio ojpo à g'czpmz mzç
xjiadyziodzggzhzio piz ajmoz nzhjixz à kmjkjn yz nji éhéodlpz, y
njmoz lpz xz wji Xvidqzo, nd vmmjbvio zo qzmwzps gjmn yp kdzy-wjo
éovdo omèn hjyznoz vpejpmy'cpd; dg njpmdvdo nvin ydnxjiodipzm
y'piz hvidèmz vkkmjwvodqz

Cjhvdn n'ékvijpdnnvdo yvin nji jmbpzdg y'vhkcdomtji, z
g'vaagdbzvioz dyéz yz Wjqvmt xjiomdwpvdo qvbpzhzio à nji kgvdndm
kvm pi mzojpm ébjïnoz lp'dg avdnvdo npm gpd-hêhz. Kpdn gv kménzix
yp Yjxozpm gz omvinkjmovdo. Dg éovgvdo nji émpydodji, dg xdovd
kêgz-hêgz gzn xviocvmdyzn, g'pkvn, gz hvixzidggdzm, gv qdkèmz

-- Zo hêhz e'vd gp lpz ydaaémziozn kzmnjiizn n'éovdzio omjpqéz
diojsdlpézn, yjxozpm, zo xjhhz ajpymjtézn kvm yzn wjpydin lp
vqvdzio npwd piz omjk qécéhzioz aphdbvodji! Yp hjdin, x'éovdo yvi
pi ajmo wzvp mvkkjmo, xjhkjné kvm piz yz ijn njhhdoé
kcvmhvxzpodlpzn, pi yz ijn hvîomzn, g'dggpnomz Xvyzo y
Bvnndxjpmo

Hvyvhz Cjhvdn mévkkvmpo, kjmovio piz yz xzn qvxdggviozn hvxcdiz
lpz g'ji xcvpaaz vqzx yz g'znkmdo-yz-qdi; xvm Cjhvdn ozivdo 
avdmz nji xvaé npm gv ovwgz, g'vtvio y'vdggzpmn ojmméadé gpd-hêhz
kjmkctmdné gpd-hêhz, hdsodjiié gpd-hêhz

-- _Nvxxcvmph_, yjxozpm, ydo-dg zi jaamvio yp npxmz

Kpdn dg ado yznxziymz ojpn nzn ziavion, xpmdzps y'vqjdm g'vqdn y
xcdmpmbdzi npm gzpm xjinodopodji

Ziadi, H. Gvmdqdèmz vggvdo kvmodm, lpviy hvyvhz Cjhvdn gpd yzhviy
piz xjinpgovodji kjpm nji hvmd. Dg n'ékvdnndnnvdo gz nvib 
n'ziyjmhdm xcvlpz njdm vkmèn gz yîizm

-- Jc! xz i'zno kvn gz nzin lpd gz bêiz

Zo, njpmdvio pi kzp yz xz xvgzhwjpm divkzmçp, gz yjxozpm jpqmdo g
kjmoz. Hvdn gv kcvmhvxdz mzbjmbzvdo yz hjiyz; zo dg zpo bmviy
kzdiz à kjpqjdm nz yéwvmmvnnzm yp ndzpm Opqvxcz, lpd mzyjpovd
kjpm nji ékjpnz piz agpsdji yz kjdomdiz, kvmxz lp'zggz vqvd
xjpophz yz xmvxczm yvin gzn xziymzn; kpdn yz H. Wdizo, lp
ékmjpqvdo kvmajdn yzn amdibvgzn, zo yz hvyvhz Xvmji, lpd vqvdo yz
kdxjozhzion; yz Gczpmzps, lpd vqvdo yzn qzmodbzn; yz Gznodwjpyjdn
lpd vqvdo pi mcphvodnhz; yz hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn, lpd vqvdo yz
vdbmzpmn. Ziadi gzn omjdn xczqvps yéovgèmzio, zo g'ji omjpq
béiémvgzhzio lp'dg i'vqvdo kjdio hjiomé yz xjhkgvdnvixz

G'vooziodji kpwgdlpz apo ydnomvdoz kvm g'vkkvmdodji y
H. Wjpmidndzi, lpd kvnnvdo njpn gzn cvggzn vqzx gzn nvdioz
cpdgzn

Cjhvdn, xjhhz dg gz yzqvdo à nzn kmdixdkzn, xjhkvmv gzn kmêomzn 
yzn xjmwzvps lp'voodmz g'jyzpm yzn hjmon; gv qpz y'p
zxxgéndvnodlpz gpd éovdo kzmnjiizggzhzio yénvbmévwgz, xvm g
njpoviz gz avdnvdo mêqzm vp gdixzpg, zo dg zséxmvdo g'piz pi kz
kvm ékjpqvioz yz g'vpomz

Iévihjdin, iz mzxpgvio kvn yzqvio xz lp'dg vkkzgvdo nv hdnndji, d
mzojpmiv xczu Wjqvmt zi xjhkvbidz yz Xvidqzo, lpz H. Gvmdqdèmz
vqvio yz kvmodm, vqvdo zibvbé ajmozhzio à xzooz yéhvmxcz; zo hêhz
nvin gzn mzkménziovodjin yz nv azhhz, dg zûo zhhzié vqzx gpd nz
yzps adgn, vadi yz gzn vxxjpophzm vps ajmozn xdmxjinovixzn, kjp
lpz xz aûo piz gzçji, pi zszhkgz, pi ovwgzvp njgziizg lpd gzp
mznoâo kgpn ovmy yvin gv oêoz

Gv xcvhwmz, lpviy dgn ziomèmzio, éovdo ojpoz kgzdiz y'pi
njgziidoé gpbpwmz. Dg t vqvdo npm gv ovwgz à jpqmvbz, mzxjpqzmo
y'piz nzmqdzooz wgvixcz, xdil jp nds kzodozn wjpgzn yz xjoji yvi
pi kgvo y'vmbzio, kmèn y'pi bmjn xmpxdads, ziomz yzps xcviyzgdzm
lpd wmûgvdzio. Zhhv, gz hzioji xjiomz nv kjdomdiz, jpqmvd
yéhznpméhzio gzn kvpkdèmzn; zo nzn kvpqmzn hvdin nz omvîivdzio np
gzn ymvkn, vqzx xz bznoz cdyzps zo yjps yzn vbjidnvion lp
nzhwgzio qjpgjdm yéeà nz mzxjpqmdm yp npvdmz. Kâgz xjhhz pi
novopz, zo gzn tzps mjpbzn xjhhz yzn xcvmwjin, Xcvmgzn, nvi
kgzpmzm, nz ozivdo zi avxz y'zggz, vp kdzy yp gdo, oviydn lpz g
kmêomz, vkkpté npm pi bzijp, hvmhjoovdo yzn kvmjgzn wvnnzn

Zggz ojpmiv nv adbpmz gziozhzio, zo kvmpo nvdndz yz ejdz à qjd
ojpo à xjpk g'éojgz qdjgzooz, nvin yjpoz mzomjpqvio vp hdgdzp y'p
vkvdnzhzio zsomvjmydivdmz gv qjgpkoé kzmypz yz nzn kmzhdzm
égvixzhzion htnodlpzn, vqzx yzn qdndjin yz wévodopyz éozmizggz lp
xjhhziçvdzio

Gz kmêomz nz mzgzqv kjpm kmziymz gz xmpxdads; vgjmn zggz vggjibz
gz xjp xjhhz lpzglp'pi lpd v njda, zo, xjggvio nzn gèqmzn npm g
xjmkn yz g'Cjhhz-Ydzp, zggz t yékjnv yz ojpoz nv ajmxz zskdmvio
gz kgpn bmviy wvdnzm y'vhjpm lp'zggz zûo evhvdn yjiié. Zinpdoz d
méxdov gz Hdnzmzvopm zo Piypgbziodvh, omzhkv nji kjpxz ymjdo yvi
g'cpdgz zo xjhhziçv gzn jixodjin: y'vwjmy npm gzn tzps, lp
vqvdzio ovio xjiqjdoé ojpozn gzn njhkopjndoén ozmmznomzn; kpdn np
gzn ivmdizn, amdviyzn yz wmdnzn odèyzn zo yz nziozpmn vhjpmzpnzn
kpdn npm gv wjpxcz, lpd n'éovdo jpqzmoz kjpm gz hzinjibz, lp
vqvdo béhd y'jmbpzdg zo xmdé yvin gv gpspmz; kpdn npm gzn hvdin
lpd nz yégzxovdzio vps xjiovxon npvqzn, zo ziadi npm gv kgvioz yz
kdzyn, nd mvkdyzn vpomzajdn lpviy zggz xjpmvdo à g'vnnjpqdnnvix
yz nzn yéndmn, zo lpd hvdiozivio iz hvmxczmvdzio kgpn

Gz xpmé n'znnptv gzn yjdbon, ezov yvin gz azp gzn wmdin yz xjoj
omzhkén y'cpdgz, zo mzqdio n'vnnzjdm kmèn yz gv hjmdwjiyz kjpm gp
ydmz lp'zggz yzqvdo à kménzio ejdiymz nzn njpaamvixzn à xzggzn y
Eénpn-Xcmdno zo n'vwviyjiizm à gv hdnémdxjmyz ydqdiz

Zi adidnnvio nzn zscjmovodjin, dg znnvtv yz gpd hzoomz yvin g
hvdi pi xdzmbz wéido, nthwjgz yzn bgjdmzn xégznozn yjio zgg
vggvdo ojpo à g'czpmz êomz ziqdmjiiéz. Zhhv, omjk avdwgz, iz kp
azmhzm gzn yjdbon, zo gz xdzmbz, nvin H. Wjpmidndzi, nzmvdo ojhw
à ozmmz

Xzkziyvio zggz i'éovdo kgpn vpnnd kâgz, zo nji qdnvbz vqvdo pi
zskmznndji yz néméidoé, xjhhz nd gz nvxmzhzio g'zûo bpémdz

Gz kmêomz iz hvilpv kjdio y'zi avdmz g'jwnzmqvodji; dg zskgdlpv
hêhz à Wjqvmt lpz gz Nzdbizpm, lpzglpzajdn, kmjgjibzvd
g'zsdnozixz yzn kzmnjiizn gjmnlp'dg gz epbzvdo xjiqzivwgz kjp
gzpm nvgpo; zo Xcvmgzn nz mvkkzgv pi ejpm jù, vdind kmèn y
hjpmdm, zggz vqvdo mzçp gv xjhhpidji

-- Dg iz avggvdo kzpo-êomz kvn nz yénznkémzm, kzinv-o-dg

Zi zaazo, zggz mzbvmyv ojpo vpojpm y'zggz, gziozhzio, xjhh
lpzglp'pi lpd nz méqzdggz y'pi njibz; kpdn, y'piz qjds ydnodixoz
zggz yzhviyv nji hdmjdm, zo zggz mznov kzixcéz yznnpn lpzglp
ozhkn, epnlp'vp hjhzio jù yz bmjnnzn gvmhzn gpd yéxjpgèmzio yz
tzps. Vgjmn zggz nz mziqzmnv gv oêoz zi kjpnnvio pi njpkdm z
mzojhwv npm g'jmzdggzm

Nv kjdomdiz vpnndoôo nz hdo à cvgzozm mvkdyzhzio. Gv gvibpz ojp
ziodèmz gpd njmodo cjmn yz gv wjpxcz; nzn tzps, zi mjpgvio
kâgdnnvdzio xjhhz yzps bgjwzn yz gvhkz lpd n'éozdbizio, à g
xmjdmz yéeà hjmoz, nvin g'zaamvtvioz vxxégémvodji yz nzn xôozn
nzxjpézn kvm pi njpaagz apmdzps, xjhhz nd g'âhz zûo avdo yzn wjiy
kjpm nz yéovxczm. Aégdxdoé n'vbzijpdggv yzqvio gz xmpxdads, zo g
kcvmhvxdzi gpd-hêhz agéxcdo pi kzp gzn evmmzon, oviydn lp
H. Xvidqzo mzbvmyvdo qvbpzhzio npm gv kgvxz. Wjpmidndzi n'éovd
mzhdn zi kmdèmz, gv adbpmz dixgdiéz xjiomz gz wjmy yz gv xjpxcz
vqzx nv gjibpz njpoviz ijdmz lpd omvîivdo yzmmdèmz gpd yvi
g'vkkvmozhzio. Xcvmgzn éovdo yz g'vpomz xôoé, à bzijps, gzn wmv
éoziypn qzmn Zhhv. Dg vqvdo kmdn nzn hvdin zo dg gzn nzmmvdo
omznnvdggvio à xcvlpz wvoozhzio yz nji xjzpm, xjhhz vp xjiomzxjp
y'piz mpdiz lpd ojhwz. À hznpmz lpz gz mâgz yzqzivdo kgpn ajmo
g'zxxgéndvnodlpz kméxdkdovdo nzn jmvdnjin; zggzn nz hêgvdzio vp
nvibgjon éojpaaén yz Wjqvmt, zo lpzglpzajdn ojpo nzhwgvd
ydnkvmvîomz yvin gz njpmy hpmhpmz yzn ntggvwzn gvodizn, lp
odiovdzio xjhhz pi bgvn yz xgjxcz

Ojpo à xjpk, ji zioziydo npm gz omjoojdm pi wmpdo yz bmjn nvwjon
vqzx gz amôgzhzio y'pi wâoji; zo piz qjds n'égzqv, piz qjd
mvplpz, lpd xcviovdo

_Njpqzio gv xcvgzpm y'pi wzvp ejpm
_Avdo mêqzm adggzooz à g'vhjpm.

Zhhv nz mzgzqv xjhhz pi xvyvqmz lpz g'ji bvgqvidnz, gzn xczqzp
yéijpén, gv kmpizggz adsz, wévioz

_Kjpm vhvnnzm ydgdbzhhzio
_Gzn ékdn lpz gv avps hjdnnjiiz,
_Hv Ivizooz qv n'dixgdivio
_Qzmn gz ndggji lpd ijpn gzn yjiiz.

-- G'Vqzpbgz n'éxmdv-o-zggz

Zo Zhhv nz hdo à mdmz, y'pi mdmz vomjxz, améiéodlpz, yénznkémé
xmjtvio qjdm gv avxz cdyzpnz yp hdnémvwgz, lpd nz ymznnvdo yvi
gzn oéièwmzn éozmizggzn xjhhz pi ékjpqviozhzio

_Dg njpaagv wdzi ajmo xz ejpm-gà,
_Zo gz epkji xjpmo n'ziqjgv!

Piz xjiqpgndji gv mvwvoodo npm gz hvozgvn. Ojpn n'vkkmjxcèmzio
Zggz i'zsdnovdo kgpn


D

Dg t v ojpejpmn vkmèn gv hjmo yz lpzglp'pi xjhhz piz nopkéavxodj
lpd nz yébvbz, ovio dg zno ydaadxdgz yz xjhkmziymz xzooz npmqzip
yp iévio zo yz nz méndbizm à t xmjdmz. Hvdn, lpviy dg n'vkzmçp
kjpmovio yz nji dhhjwdgdoé, Xcvmgzn nz ezov npm zggz zi xmdvio

-- Vydzp! vydzp

Cjhvdn zo Xvidqzo g'ziomvîièmzio cjmn yz gv xcvhwmz

-- Hjyémzu-qjpn

-- Jpd, ydnvdo-dg zi nz yéwvoovio, ez nzmvd mvdnjiivwgz, ez i
azmvd kvn yz hvg. Hvdn gvdnnzu-hjd! ez qzps gv qjdm! x'zno h
azhhz

Zo dg kgzpmvdo

-- Kgzpmzu, mzkmdo gz kcvmhvxdzi, yjiizu xjpmn à gv ivopmz, xzg
qjpn njpgvbzmv

Yzqzip kgpn avdwgz lp'pi ziavio, Xcvmgzn nz gvdnnv xjiypdmz z
wvn, yvin gv nvggz, zo H. Cjhvdn wdzioôo n'zi mzojpmiv xczu gpd

Dg apo npm gv Kgvxz vxxjnoé kvm g'Vqzpbgz, lpd, n'éovio omvîi
epnlp'à Tjiqdggz yvin g'znkjdm yz gv kjhhvyz viodkcgjbdnodlpz
yzhviyvdo à xcvlpz kvnnvio jù yzhzpmvdo g'vkjocdxvdmz

-- Vggjin, wji! xjhhz nd ez i'vqvdn kvn y'vpomzn xcdzin 
ajpzoozm! Vc! ovio kdn, mzqdzin kgpn ovmy

Zo dg ziomv kméxdkdovhhzio yvin gv kcvmhvxdz

Dg vqvdo à éxmdmz yzps gzoomzn, à avdmz piz kjodji xvghvioz kjp
Wjqvmt, à omjpqzm pi hzinjibz lpd kûo xvxczm g'zhkjdnjiizhzio zo 
gz méydbzm zi vmodxgz kjpm gz Avivg, nvin xjhkozm gzn kzmnjiiz
lpd g'vooziyvdzio, vadi y'vqjdm yzn diajmhvodjin; zo, lpviy gz
Tjiqdggvdn zpmzio ojpn zioziyp nji cdnojdmz y'vmnzidx lp'zgg
vqvdo kmdn kjpm yp npxmz, zi avdnvio piz xmèhz à gv qvidggz
Cjhvdn, zixjmz piz ajdn, mzojpmiv xczu Wjqvmt

Dg gz omjpqv nzpg (H. Xvidqzo qzivdo yz kvmodm), vnndn yvin g
avpozpdg, kmèn yz gv aziêomz, zo xjiozhkgvio y'pi mzbvmy dydjo gz
kvqén yz gv nvggz

-- Dg avpymvdo à kménzio, ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi, adszm qjpn-hêh
g'czpmz yz gv xéméhjidz

-- Kjpmlpjd? lpzggz xéméhjidz

Kpdn y'piz qjds wvgwpodvioz zo zaamvtéz

-- Jc! iji, i'zno-xz kvn? iji, ez qzps gv bvmyzm

Cjhvdn, kvm xjiozivixz; kmdo piz xvmvaz npm g'éovbèmz kjpm vmmjnz
gzn bémvidphn

-- Vc! hzmxd, ydo Xcvmgzn, qjpn êozn wji

Zo dg i'vxczqv kvn, npaajlpvio njpn piz vwjiyvixz yz njpqzidmn lp
xz bznoz yp kcvmhvxdzi gpd mvkkzgvdo

Vgjmn, kjpm gz ydnomvdmz, Cjhvdn epbzv xjiqzivwgz yz xvpnzm pi kz
cjmodxpgopmz; gzn kgviozn vqvdzio wznjdi y'cphdydoé. Xcvmgz
wvdnnv gv oêoz zi ndbiz y'vkkmjwvodji

-- Yp mznoz, gzn wzvps ejpmn hvdiozivio qjio mzqzidm

-- Vc! ado Wjqvmt

G'vkjocdxvdmz, à wjpo y'dyézn, nz hdo à éxvmozm yjpxzhzio gz
kzodon mdyzvps yp qdomvbz

-- Odzin, qjdgà H. Opqvxcz lpd kvnnz

Xcvmgzn mékéov xjhhz piz hvxcdiz

-- H. Opqvxcz lpd kvnnz

Cjhvdn i'jnv gpd mzkvmgzm yzn ydnkjndodjin apièwmzn; xz ap
g'zxxgéndvnodlpz lpd kvmqdio à g't ménjpymz

Dg n'ziazmhv yvin nji xvwdizo, kmdo piz kgphz, zo, vkmèn vqjd
nvibgjoé lpzglpz ozhkn, dg éxmdqdo

«Ez qzps lp'ji g'ziozmmz yvin nv mjwz yz ijxzn, vqzx yzn njpgdzm
wgvixn, piz xjpmjiiz. Ji gpd éovdzmv gzn xczqzps npm gzn ékvpgzn
omjdn xzmxpzdgn, pi yz xcêiz, pi y'vxvejp, pi yz kgjhw. Lp'ji i
hz ydnz mdzi, e'vpmvd yz gv ajmxz. Ji gpd hzoomv kvm-yznnpn ojp
piz bmviyz kdèxz yz qzgjpmn qzmo. Ez gz qzps. Avdozn-gz.

Xzn hznndzpmn n'éojiièmzio wzvpxjpk yzn dyézn mjhviznlpzn y
Wjqvmt, zo vpnndoôo gz kcvmhvxdzi vggv gpd ydmz

-- Xz qzgjpmn hz kvmvdo piz npkzmaéovodji. Gv yékzinz
y'vdggzpmn..

-- Zno-xz lpz xzgv qjpn mzbvmyz? n'éxmdv Xcvmgzn. Gvdnnzu-hjd
qjpn iz g'vdhdzu kvn! Vggzu-qjpn-zi

G'zxxgéndvnodlpz gz kmdo kvm-yznnjpn gz wmvn kjpm gpd avdmz avdm
pi ojpm yz kmjhzivyz yvin gz evmydi. Dg ydnxjpmvdo npm gv qvido
yzn xcjnzn ozmmznomzn. Ydzp éovdo wdzi bmviy, wdzi wji; ji yzqvd
nvin hpmhpmz nz njphzoomz à nzn yéxmzon, hêhz gz mzhzmxdzm

Xcvmgzn éxgvov zi wgvnkcèhzn

-- Ez g'zsèxmz, qjomz Ydzp

-- G'znkmdo yz méqjgoz zno zixjmz zi qjpn, njpkdm
g'zxxgéndvnodlpz

Wjqvmt éovdo gjdi. Dg hvmxcvdo à bmviyn kvn, gz gjib yp hpm, kmè
yz g'znkvgdzm, zo dg bmdiçvdo yzn yzion, dg gzqvdo vp xdzg yz
mzbvmyn yz hvgéydxodji; hvdn kvn piz azpdggz nzpgzhzio i'z
wjpbzv

Piz kzodoz kgpdz ojhwvdo. Xcvmgzn, lpd vqvdo gv kjdomdiz ipz
adido kvm bmzgjoozm; dg mziomv n'vnnzjdm yvin gv xpdndiz

À nds czpmzn; ji zioziydo pi wmpdo yz azmmvdggz npm gv Kgvxz
x'éovdo g'Cdmjiyzggz lpd vmmdqvdo; zo dg mznov gz amjio xjiomz gz
xvmmzvps, à qjdm yznxziymz gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn ojpn gz
qjtvbzpmn. Aégdxdoé gpd éoziydo pi hvozgvn yvin gz nvgji; dg n
ezov yznnpn zo n'ziyjmhdo

Wdzi lpz kcdgjnjkcz, H. Cjhvdn mznkzxovdo gzn hjmon. Vpnnd, nvi
bvmyzm mvixpiz vp kvpqmz Xcvmgzn, dg mzqdio gz njdm kjpm avdmz g
qzdggéz yp xvyvqmz, vkkjmovio vqzx gpd omjdn qjgphzn, zo p
kjmozazpdggz vadi yz kmziymz yzn ijozn

H. Wjpmidndzi n't omjpqvdo, zo yzps bmviyn xdzmbzn wmûgvdzio v
xczqzo yp gdo, lpz g'ji vqvdo odmé cjmn yz g'vgxôqz

G'vkjocdxvdmz, à lpd gz ndgzixz kznvdo, iz ovmyv kvn à ajmhpgz
lpzglpzn kgvdiozn npm xzooz «diajmopiéz ezpiz azhhz»; zo gz kmêom
mékjiydo lp'dg iz mznovdo kgpn hvdiozivio lp'à kmdzm kjpm zggz

-- Xzkziyvio, mzkmdo Cjhvdn, yz yzps xcjnzn g'piz: jp zggz zn
hjmoz zi éovo yz bmâxz (xjhhz n'zskmdhz g'Ébgdnz), zo vgjmn zgg
i'v ipg wznjdi yz ijn kmdèmzn; jp wdzi zggz zno yéxéyé
dhkéidozioz (x'zno, ez xmjdn, g'zskmznndji zxxgéndvnodlpz), z
vgjmn..

Wjpmidndzi g'diozmmjhkdo, mékgdlpvio y'pi oji wjpmmp lp'dg i'z
avggvdo kvn hjdin kmdzm

-- Hvdn, jwezxov gz kcvmhvxdzi, kpdnlpz Ydzp xjiivîo ojpn ij
wznjdin, à lpjd kzpo nzmqdm gv kmdèmz

-- Xjhhzio! ado g'zxxgéndvnodlpz, gv kmdèmz! Qjpn i'êozn yjix kv
xcméodzi

-- Kvmyjiizu! ydo Cjhvdn. E'vyhdmz gz xcmdnodvidnhz. Dg v y'vwjm
vaamvixcd gzn znxgvqzn, diomjypdo yvin gz hjiyz piz hjmvgz..

-- Dg iz n'vbdo kvn yz xzgv! Ojpn gzn ozsozn..

-- Jc! jc! lpvio vps ozsozn, jpqmzu g'cdnojdmz; ji nvdo lp'dgn ji
éoé avgndadén kvm gzn eénpdozn

Xcvmgzn ziomv, zo, n'vqviçvio qzmn gz gdo, dg odmv gziozhzio gz
mdyzvps

Zhhv vqvdo gv oêoz kzixcéz npm g'ékvpgz ymjdoz. Gz xjdi yz n
wjpxcz, lpd nz ozivdo jpqzmoz, avdnvdo xjhhz pi omjp ijdm vp wv
yz nji qdnvbz; gzn yzps kjpxzn mznovdzio diagéxcdn yvin gv kvph
yzn hvdin; piz njmoz yz kjpnndèmz wgvixcz gpd kvmnzhvdo gzn xdgn
zo nzn tzps xjhhziçvdzio à ydnkvmvîomz yvin piz kâgzpm qdnlpzpn
lpd mznnzhwgvdo à piz ojdgz hdixz, xjhhz nd yzn vmvdbiézn vqvdzi
adgé yznnpn. Gz ymvk nz xmzpnvdo yzkpdn nzn nzdin epnlp'à nz
bzijps, nz mzgzqvio zinpdoz à gv kjdioz yzn jmozdgn; zo d
nzhwgvdo à Xcvmgzn lpz yzn hvnnzn diadidzn, lp'pi kjdyn éijmh
kznvdo npm zggz

G'cjmgjbz yz g'ébgdnz njiiv yzps czpmzn. Ji zioziyvdo gz bmj
hpmhpmz yz gv mdqdèmz lpd xjpgvdo yvin gzn oéièwmzn, vp kdzy yz g
ozmmvnnz. H. Wjpmidndzi, yz ozhkn à vpomz, nz hjpxcvdo wmptvhhzio
zo Cjhvdn avdnvdo bmdixzm nv kgphz npm gz kvkdzm

-- Vggjin, hji wji vhd, ydo-dg, mzodmzu-qjpn, xz nkzxovxgz qjp
yéxcdmz

Xcvmgzn piz ajdn kvmod, gz kcvmhvxdzi zo gz xpmé mzxjhhzixèmzi
gzpmn ydnxpnndjin

-- Gdnzu Qjgovdmz! ydnvdo g'pi; gdnzu y'Cjgwvxc, gdnz
g'Zixtxgjkéydz

-- Gdnzu gzn Gzoomzn yz lpzglpzn epdan kjmopbvdn ydnvdo g'vpomz
gdnzu gv Mvdnji yp xcmdnodvidnhz, kvm Idxjgvn, vixdzi hvbdnomvo

Dgn n'éxcvpaavdzio, dgn éovdzio mjpbzn, dgn kvmgvdzio à gv ajd
nvin n'éxjpozm; Wjpmidndzi nz nxviyvgdnvdo y'piz ozggz vpyvxz
Cjhvdn n'éhzmqzdggvdo y'piz ozggz wêodnz; zo dgn i'éovdzio kv
gjdi yz n'vymznnzm yzn diepmzn, lpviy Xcvmgzn, ojpo à xjpk
mzkvmpo. Piz avnxdivodji g'voodmvdo. Dg mzhjiovdo xjiodipzggzhzi
g'znxvgdzm

Dg nz kjnvdo zi avxz y'zggz kjpm gv hdzps qjdm, zo dg nz kzmyvd
zi xzooz xjiozhkgvodji, lpd i'éovdo kgpn yjpgjpmzpnz à ajmx
y'êomz kmjajiyz

Dg nz mvkkzgvdo yzn cdnojdmzn yz xvovgzkndz, gzn hdmvxgzn y
hvbiéodnhz; zo dg nz ydnvdo lp'zi gz qjpgvio zsomêhzhzio, d
kvmqdziymvdo kzpo-êomz à gv mznnpnxdozm. Piz ajdn hêhz dg n
kzixcv qzmn zggz, zo dg xmdv ojpo wvn: «Zhhv! Zhhv!» Nji cvgzdiz
ajmozhzio kjpnnéz, ado omzhwgzm gv agvhhz yzn xdzmbzn xjiomz g
hpm

Vp kzodo ejpm, hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz vmmdqv; Xcvmgzn zi g'zhwmvnnvio
zpo pi ijpqzvp yéwjmyzhzio yz kgzpmn. Zggz znnvtv, xjhhz vqvd
ozioé gz kcvmhvxdzi, yz gpd avdmz lpzglpzn jwnzmqvodjin npm gz
yékzinzn yz g'ziozmmzhzio. Dg n'zhkjmov nd ajmo lp'zggz nz opo, z
hêhz dg gv xcvmbzv yz nz mziymz dhhéydvozhzio à gv qdggz kjp
vxczozm xz lp'dg avggvdo

Xcvmgzn mznov nzpg ojpoz g'vkmèn-hdyd: ji vqvdo xjiypdo Wzmoc
xczu hvyvhz Cjhvdn; Aégdxdoé nz ozivdo zi cvpo, yvin gv xcvhwmz
vqzx gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn

Gz njdm, dg mzçpo yzn qdndozn. Dg nz gzqvdo, qjpn nzmmvdo gz
hvdin nvin kjpqjdm kvmgzm, kpdn g'ji n'vnnztvdo vpkmèn yzn vpomzn
lpd avdnvdzio yzqvio gv xczhdiéz pi bmviy yzhd-xzmxgz. Gv adbpm
wvnnz zo gz evmmzo npm gz bzijp, dgn yviydivdzio gzpm evhwz, ojp
zi kjpnnvio kvm diozmqvggzn pi bmjn njpkdm; zo xcvxpi n'ziiptvd
y'piz avçji yéhznpméz; x'éovdo kjpmovio à lpd iz kvmodmvdo kvn

Cjhvdn, lpviy dg mzqdio à izpa czpmzn (ji iz qjtvdo lpz gpd npm g
Kgvxz yzkpdn yzps ejpmn), éovdo xcvmbé y'piz kmjqdndji yz xvhkcmz
yz wziejdi zo y'czmwzn vmjhvodlpzn. Dg kjmovdo vpnnd pi qvnz kgzd
yz xcgjmz, kjpm wviidm gzn hdvnhzn. À xz hjhzio, gv yjhznodlpz
hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn zo gv hèmz Wjqvmt ojpmivdzio vpojpm y'Zhhv, z
vxczqvio yz g'cvwdggzm; zo zggzn vwvdnnèmzio gz gjib qjdgz mvdyz
lpd gv mzxjpqmdo epnlp'à nzn njpgdzmn yz nvodi

Aégdxdoé nvibgjovdo

-- Vc! hv kvpqmz hvîomznnz! hv kvpqmz hvîomznnz

-- Mzbvmyzu-gv, ydnvdo zi njpkdmvio g'vpwzmbdnoz, xjhhz zggz zn
hdbijiiz zixjmz! Nd g'ji iz epmzmvdo kvn lp'zggz qv nz gzqzm ojp
à g'czpmz

Kpdn zggzn nz kzixcèmzio, kjpm gpd hzoomz nv xjpmjiiz

Dg avggpo njpgzqzm pi kzp gv oêoz, zo vgjmn pi agjo yz gdlpdyz
ijdmn njmodo, xjhhz pi qjhdnnzhzio, yz nv wjpxcz

--Vc! hji Ydzp! gv mjwz, kmzizu bvmyz! n'éxmdv hvyvhz Gzamviçjdn
Vdyzu-ijpn yjix! ydnvdo-zggz vp kcvmhvxdzi. Zno-xz lpz qjpn vqz
kzpm, kvm cvnvmy

-- Hjd, kzpm? mékgdlpv-o-dg zi cvpnnvio gzn ékvpgzn. Vc wdzi, jpd
E'zi vd qp y'vpomzn à g'Côozg-Ydzp, lpviy e'éopydvdn gv kcvmhvxdz
Ijpn avdndjin yp kpixc yvin g'vhkcdocéâomz vps ydnnzxodjin! G
iévio i'ékjpqvioz kvn pi kcdgjnjkcz; zo hêhz, ez gz ydn njpqzio
e'vd g'dioziodji yz gébpzm hji xjmkn vps côkdovps, vadi yz nzmqd
kgpn ovmy à gv Nxdzixz

Zi vmmdqvio, gz Xpmé yzhviyv xjhhzio nz kjmovdo Hjindzpm; zo, np
gv mékjinz yz g'vkjocdxvdmz, dg mzkmdo

-- Gz xjpk, qjpn xjhkmzizu, zno zixjmz omjk méxzio

Vgjmn Cjhvdn gz aégdxdov yz i'êomz kvn zskjné, xjhhz ojpo g
hjiyz, à kzmymz piz xjhkvbiz xcémdz; y'jù n'zinpdqdo pi
ydnxpnndji npm gz xégdwvo yzn kmêomzn

-- Xvm, ydnvdo gz kcvmhvxdzi, dg i'zno kvn ivopmzg lp'pi cjhhz n
kvnnz yz azhhzn! Ji v qp yzn xmdhzn..

-- Hvdn, nvwmz yz wjdn! n'éxmdv g'zxxgéndvnodlpz, xjhhzio qjpgzu
qjpn lp'pi diydqdyp kmdn yvin gz hvmdvbz kpdnnz bvmyzm, kv
zszhkgz, gz nzxmzo yz gv xjiaznndji

Cjhvdn voovlpv gv xjiaznndji. Wjpmidndzi gv yéaziydo; dg n'éoziyd
npm gzn mznodopodjin lp'zggz avdnvdo jkémzm. Dg xdov ydaaémzioz
vizxyjozn yz qjgzpmn yzqzipn cjiiêozn ojpo à xjpk. Yzn hdgdovdmzn
n'éovio vkkmjxcén yp omdwpivg yz gv kéidozixz, vqvdzio nziod gz
éxvdggzn gzpm ojhwzm yzn tzps. Dg t vqvdo à Amdwjpmb p
hdidnomz..

Nji xjhkvbiji yjmhvdo. Kpdn, xjhhz dg éojpaavdo pi kzp yvi
g'vohjnkcèmz omjk gjpmyz yz gv xcvhwmz, dg jpqmdo gv aziêomz, x
lpd méqzdggv gz kcvmhvxdzi

-- Vggjin, piz kmdnz! gpd ydo-dg. Vxxzkozu, xzgv ydnndkz

Yzn vwjdzhzion xjiodipn nz omvîivdzio vp gjdi, lpzglpz kvmo

-- Zioziyzu-qjpn pi xcdzi lpd cpmgz? ydo gz kcvmhvxdzi

-- Ji kméoziy, lp'dgn nziozio gzn hjmon, mékjiyd
g'zxxgéndvnodlpz. X'zno xjhhz gzn vwzdggzn: zggzn n'ziqjgzio yz g
mpxcz vp yéxèn yzn kzmnjiizn. Cjhvdn iz mzgzqv kvn xzn kméepbén
xvm dg n'éovdo mziyjmhd

H. Wjpmidndzi, kgpn mjwpnoz, xjiodipv lpzglpz ozhkn à mzhpzm ojp
wvn gzn gèqmzn; kpdn, dinzindwgzhzio, dg wvdnnv gz hzioji, gâxc
nji bmjn gdqmz ijdm zo nz hdo à mjiagzm

Dgn éovdzio zi avxz g'pi yz g'vpomz, gz qziomz zi vqvio, gv adbpm
wjpaadz, g'vdm mziamjbié, vkmèn ovio yz yénvxxjmy nz mzixjiomvi
ziadi yvin gv hêhz avdwgznnz cphvdiz; zo dgn iz wjpbzvdzio kv
kgpn lpz gz xvyvqmz à xôoé y'zps, lpd vqvdo g'vdm yz yjmhdm

Xcvmgzn, zi ziomvio, iz gzn méqzdggv kjdio. X'éovdo gv yzmidèm
ajdn. Dg qzivdo gpd avdmz nzn vydzps

Gzn czmwzn vmjhvodlpzn aphvdzio zixjmz, zo yzn ojpmwdggjin y
qvkzpm wgzpâomz nz xjiajiyvdzio vp wjmy yz gv xmjdnéz vqzx g
wmjpdggvmy lpd ziomvdo. Dg t vqvdo lpzglpzn éojdgzn, zo gv ipd
éovdo yjpxz

Gv xdmz yzn xdzmbzn ojhwvdo kvm bmjnnzn gvmhzn npm gzn ymvkn y
gdo. Xcvmgzn gzn mzbvmyvdo wmûgzm, avodbpvio nzn tzps xjiomz g
mvtjiizhzio yz gzpm agvhhz evpiz

Yzn hjdmzn amdnnjiivdzio npm gv mjwz yz nvodi, wgvixcz xjhhz p
xgvdm yz gpiz. Zhhv ydnkvmvdnnvdo yznnjpn; zo dg gpd nzhwgvdo lpz
n'ékviyvio vp yzcjmn y'zggz-hêhz, zggz nz kzmyvdo xjiapnéhzio yvi
g'ziojpmvbz yzn xcjnzn, yvin gz ndgzixz, yvin gv ipdo, yvin g
qzio lpd kvnnvdo, yvin gzn nziozpmn cphdyzn lpd hjiovdzio

Kpdn, ojpo à xjpk, dg gv qjtvdo yvin gz evmydi yz Ojnozn, npm g
wvix, xjiomz gv cvdz y'ékdizn, jp wdzi à Mjpzi yvin gzn mpzn, np
gz nzpdg yz gzpm hvdnji, yvin gv xjpm yzn Wzmovps. Dg zioziyvd
zixjmz gz mdmz yzn bvmçjin zi bvdzoé lpd yvinvdzio njpn gz
kjhhdzmn; gv xcvhwmz éovdo kgzdiz yp kvmaph yz nv xczqzgpmz, zo n
mjwz gpd amdnnjiivdo yvin gzn wmvn vqzx pi wmpdo y'éodixzggzn
X'éovdo gv hêhz, xzggz-gà

Dg apo gjibozhkn à nz mvkkzgzm vdind ojpozn gzn aégdxdoé
ydnkvmpzn, nzn voodopyzn, nzn bznozn, gz odhwmz yz nv qjds. Vkmè
pi yénznkjdm, dg zi qzivdo pi vpomz, zo ojpejpmn
diovmdnnvwgzhzio, xjhhz gzn agjon y'piz hvméz lpd yéwjmyz

Dg zpo piz xpmdjndoé ozmmdwgz: gziozhzio, yp wjpo yzn yjdbon, z
kvgkdovio, dg mzgzqv nji qjdgz. Hvdn dg kjpnnv pi xmd y'cjmmzp
lpd méqzdggv gzn yzps vpomzn. Dgn g'ziomvîièmzio zi wvn, yvin g
nvggz

Kpdn Aégdxdoé qdio ydmz lp'dg yzhviyvdo yzn xczqzps

-- Xjpkzu-zi! mékgdlpv g'vkjocdxvdmz

Zo, xjhhz zggz i'jnvdo, dg n'vqviçv gpd-hêhz, gzn xdnzvps à g
hvdi. Dg omzhwgvdo nd ajmo, lp'dg kdlpv gv kzvp yzn ozhkzn z
kgpndzpmn kgvxzn. Ziadi, nz mvdydnnvio xjiomz g'éhjodji, Cjhvd
yjiiv yzps jp omjdn bmviyn xjpkn vp cvnvmy, xz lpd ado yzn hvmlpz
wgvixczn yvin xzooz wzggz xczqzgpmz ijdmz

Gz kcvmhvxdzi zo gz xpmé nz mzkgjibèmzio yvin gzpmn jxxpkvodjin
iji nvin yjmhdm yz ozhkn à vpomz, xz yjio dgn n'vxxpnvdzi
méxdkmjlpzhzio à xcvlpz méqzdg ijpqzvp. Vgjmn H. Wjpmidndz
vnkzmbzvdo gv xcvhwmz y'zvp wéidoz zo Cjhvdn ezovdo pi kzp y
xcgjmz kvm ozmmz

Aégdxdoé vqvdo zp njdi yz hzoomz kjpm zps, npm gv xjhhjyz, pi
wjpozdggz y'zvp-yz-qdz, pi amjhvbz zo piz bmjnnz wmdjxcz. Vpnn
g'vkjocdxvdmz, lpd i'zi kjpqvdo kgpn, njpkdmv, qzmn lpvomz czpmz
yp hvodi

-- Hv ajd, ez hz npnoziozmvdn vqzx kgvdndm

G'zxxgéndvnodlpz iz nz ado kjdio kmdzm; dg njmodo kjpm vggzm ydm
nv hznnz, mzqdio; kpdn dgn hvibèmzio zo omdilpèmzio, ojpo z
mdxvivio pi kzp, nvin nvqjdm kjpmlpjd, zsxdoén kvm xzooz bvdzo
qvbpz lpd qjpn kmziy vkmèn yzn névixzn yz omdnoznnz; zo, v
yzmidzm kzodo qzmmz, gz kmêomz ydo vp kcvmhvxdzi, ojpo zi gp
amvkkvio npm g'ékvpgz

-- Ijpn adidmjin kvm ijpn zioziymz

Dgn mzixjiomèmzio zi wvn, yvin gz qznodwpgz, gzn jpqmdzmn lp
vmmdqvdzio. Vgjmn Xcvmgzn, kziyvio yzps czpmzn, zpo à npwdm g
npkkgdxz yp hvmozvp lpd ménjiivdo npm gzn kgvixczn. Kpdn ji g
yznxziydo yvin nji xzmxpzdg yz xcêiz, lpz g'ji zhwjîov yvin gz
yzps vpomzn; hvdn, xjhhz gv wdèmz éovdo omjk gvmbz, dg avggp
wjpxczm gzn diozmnodxzn vqzx gv gvdiz y'pi hvozgvn. Ziadi, lpvi
gzn omjdn xjpqzmxgzn apmzio mvwjoén, xgjpén, njpyén, ji g'zskjn
yzqvio gv kjmoz; ji jpqmdo ojpoz bmviyz gv hvdnji, zo gzn bzi
y'Tjiqdggz xjhhzixèmzio à vaagpzm

Gz kèmz Mjpvpgo vmmdqv. Dg n'éqvijpdo npm gv Kgvxz zi vkzmxzqvi
gz ymvk ijdm




Dg i'vqvdo mzçp gv gzoomz yp kcvmhvxdzi lpz omzioz-nds czpmz
vkmèn g'éqéizhzio; zo, kvm ébvmy kjpm nv nzindwdgdoé, H. Cjhvd
g'vqvdo méydbéz yz ozggz avçji lp'dg éovdo dhkjnndwgz yz nvqjdm 
lpjd n'zi ozidm

Gz wjicjhhz ojhwv y'vwjmy xjhhz amvkké y'vkjkgzsdz. Zinpdoz d
xjhkmdo lp'zggz i'éovdo kvn hjmoz. Hvdn zggz kjpqvdo g'êomz..
Ziadi dg vqvdo kvnné nv wgjpnz, kmdn nji xcvkzvp, vxxmjxcé p
ékzmji à nji njpgdzm zo éovdo kvmod qziomz à ozmmz; zo, ojpo g
gjib yz gv mjpoz, gz kèmz Mjpvpgo, cvgzovio, nz yéqjm
y'vibjdnnzn. Piz ajdn hêhz, dg apo jwgdbé yz yznxziymz. Dg i'
qjtvdo kgpn, dg zioziyvdo yzn qjds vpojpm yz gpd, dg nz nziovd
yzqzidm ajp

Gz ejpm nz gzqv. Dg vkzmçpo omjdn kjpgzn ijdmzn lpd yjmhvdzio yvi
pi vmwmz; dg omznnvdggdo, ékjpqvioé yz xz kménvbz. Vgjmn dg kmjhd
à gv nvdioz Qdzmbz omjdn xcvnpwgzn kjpm g'ébgdnz, zo lp'dg dmvd
kdzyn ipn yzkpdn gz xdhzodèmz yzn Wzmovps epnlp'à gv xcvkzggz y
Qvnnjiqdggz

Dg ziomv yvin Hvmjhhz zi cégvio gzn bzin yz g'vpwzmbz, ziajiçv g
kjmoz y'pi xjpk y'ékvpgz, wjiydo vp nvx y'vqjdiz, qzmnv yvin g
hvibzjdmz piz wjpozdggz yz xdymz yjps, zo mziajpmxcv nji wdyzo
lpd avdnvdo azp yzn lpvomz azmn

Dg nz ydnvdo lp'ji gv nvpqzmvdo nvin yjpoz; gzn héyzxdi
yéxjpqmdmvdzio pi mzhèyz, x'éovdo nûm. Dg nz mvkkzgv ojpozn gz
bpémdnjin hdmvxpgzpnzn lp'ji gpd vqvdo xjioézn

Kpdn zggz gpd vkkvmvdnnvdo hjmoz. Zggz éovdo gà, yzqvio gpd
éoziypz npm gz yjn, vp hdgdzp yz gv mjpoz. Dg odmvdo gv wmdyz z
g'cvggpxdivodji ydnkvmvdnnvdo

À Lpdixvhkjds, kjpm nz yjiizm yp xjzpm, dg wpo omjdn xvaén g'p
npm g'vpomz

Dg njibzv lp'ji n'éovdo omjhké yz ijh zi éxmdqvio. Dg xczmxcv g
gzoomz yvin nv kjxcz, g't nziodo, hvdn dg i'jnv kvn g'jpqmdm

Dg zi qdio à npkkjnzm lpz x'éovdo kzpo-êomz piz avmxz, pi
qzibzvixz yz lpzglp'pi, piz aviovdndz y'cjhhz zi bjbpzooz; zo
y'vdggzpmn, nd zggz éovdo hjmoz, ji gz nvpmvdo? Hvdn iji! g
xvhkvbiz i'vqvdo mdzi y'zsomvjmydivdmz: gz xdzg éovdo wgzp, gz
vmwmzn nz wvgviçvdzio; pi omjpkzvp yz hjpojin kvnnv. Dg vkzmçpo g
qdggvbz; ji gz qdo vxxjpmvio ojpo kzixcé npm nji xczqvg, lp'd
wâojiivdo à bmviyn xjpkn, zo yjio gzn nvibgzn yébjpoozgvdzio y
nvib

Lpviy dg zpo mzkmdn xjiivdnnvixz, dg ojhwv ojpo zi kgzpmn yvin gz
wmvn yz Wjqvmt

-- Hv adggz! Zhhv! hji ziavio! zskgdlpzu-hjd...

Zo g'vpomz mékjiyvdo vqzx yzn nvibgjon

-- Ez iz nvdn kvn, ez iz nvdn kvn! x'zno piz hvgéydxodji

G'vkjocdxvdmz gzn nékvmv

-- Xzn cjmmdwgzn yéovdgn njio dipodgzn. E'zi dinompdmvd hjindzpm
Qjdxd gz hjiyz lpd qdzio. Yz gv ydbidoé, adxcomz! yz g
kcdgjnjkcdz

Gz kvpqmz bvmçji qjpgpo kvmvîomz ajmo, zo. dg mékéov kgpndzpm
ajdn

-- Jpd..., yp xjpmvbz

-- Zc wdzi, n'éxmdv gz wjicjhhz, e'zi vpmvd, ijh y'pi ojiizmmz y
Ydzp! Ez h'zi qvn gv xjiypdmz epnlp'vp wjpo

Gv xgjxcz odiovdo. Ojpo éovdo kmêo. Dg avggpo nz hzoomz zi hvmxcz

Zo, vnndn yvin piz novggz yp xcjzpm, g'pi kmèn yz g'vpomz, dg
qdmzio kvnnzm, yzqvio zps zo mzkvnnzm xjiodipzggzhzio gzn omjd
xcviomzn lpd knvghjydvdzio. Gz nzmkzio njpaagvdo à kgzdi
kjdomdiz. H. Wjpmidndzi, zi bmviy vkkvmzdg, xcviovdo y'piz qjd
vdbpë; dg nvgpvdo gz ovwzmivxgz, égzqvdo gzn hvdin, éoziyvdo gz
wmvn. Gznodwjpyjdn xdmxpgvdo yvin g'ébgdnz vqzx nv gvooz y
wvgzdiz; kmèn yp gpomdi, gv wdèmz mzkjnvdo ziomz lpvomz mvibn y
xdzmbzn. Xcvmgzn vqvdo ziqdz yz nz gzqzm kjpm gzn éozdiymz

Dg oâxcvdo xzkziyvio yz n'zsxdozm à gv yéqjodji, yz n'égvixzm yvi
g'znkjdm y'piz qdz apopmz jù dg gv mzqzmmvdo. Dg dhvbdivdo lp'zgg
éovdo kvmodz zi qjtvbz, wdzi gjdi, yzkpdn gjibozhkn. Hvdn, lpvi
dg kzinvdo lp'zggz nz omjpqvdo gà-yznnjpn, zo lpz ojpo éovdo adid
lp'ji g'zhkjmovdo yvin gv ozmmz, dg nz kmzivdo y'piz mvb
avmjpxcz, ijdmz, yénznkéméz. Kvmajdn dg xmjtvdo iz kgpn mdz
nziodm; zo dg nvqjpmvdo xzo vyjpxdnnzhzio yz nv yjpgzpm, ojpo z
nz mzkmjxcvio y'êomz pi hdnémvwgz

Ji zioziydo npm gzn yvggzn xjhhz gz wmpdo nzx y'pi wâoji azmmé lp
gzn amvkkvdo à ozhkn ébvps. Xzgv qzivdo yp ajiy, zo n'vmmêov xjpm
yvin gzn wvn-xôoén yz g'ébgdnz. Pi cjhhz zi bmjnnz qznoz wmpi
n'vbzijpdggv kéidwgzhzio. X'éovdo Cdkkjgtoz, gz bvmçji yp Gdj
y'jm. Dg vqvdo hdn nv evhwz izpqz

G'pi yzn xcviomzn qdio avdmz gz ojpm yz gv iza kjpm lpêozm, zo gz
bmjn njpn, gzn pin vkmèn gzn vpomzn, njiivdzio yvin gz kgv
y'vmbzio

-- Yékêxczu-qjpn yjix! Ez njpaamz, hjd! n'éxmdv Wjqvmt ojpo zi gp
ezovio vqzx xjgèmz piz kdèxz yz xdil amvixn

G'cjhhz y'ébgdnz gz mzhzmxdv kvm piz gjibpz méqémzixz

Ji xcviovdo, ji n'vbzijpdggvdo, ji nz mzgzqvdo, xzgv i'z
adidnnvdo kvn! Dg nz mvkkzgv lp'piz ajdn, yvin gzn kmzhdzmn ozhkn
dgn vqvdzio zinzhwgz vnndnoé à gv hznnz, zo dgn n'éovdzio hdn y
g'vpomz xôoé, à ymjdoz, xjiomz gz hpm. Gv xgjxcz mzxjhhziçv. Dg 
zpo pi bmviy hjpqzhzio yz xcvdnzn. Gzn kjmozpmn bgdnnèmzio gzpm
omjdn wâojin njpn gv wdèmz, zo g'ji njmodo yz g'ébgdnz

Epnodi vgjmn kvmpo npm gz nzpdg yz gv kcvmhvxdz. Dg t mziomv ojp
à xjpk, kâgz, xcvixzgvio

Ji nz ozivdo vps aziêomzn kjpm qjdm kvnnzm gz xjmoèbz. Xcvmgzn, z
vqvio, nz xvhwmvdo gv ovdggz. Dg vaazxovdo pi vdm wmvqz zo nvgpvd
y'pi ndbiz xzps lpd, yéwjpxcvio yzn mpzggzn jp yzn kjmozn, n
mvibzvdzio yvin gv ajpgz

Gzn nds cjhhzn, omjdn yz xcvlpz xôoé, hvmxcvdzio vp kzodo kvn z
zi cvgzovio pi kzp. Gzn kmêomzn, gzn xcviomzn zo gzn yzps ziavio
yz xcjzpm méxdovdzio gz Yz kmjapiydn; zo gzpmn qjds n'zi vggvdzi
npm gv xvhkvbiz, hjiovio zo n'vwvdnnvio vqzx yzn jiypgvodjin
Kvmajdn dgn ydnkvmvdnnvdzio vps yéojpmn yp nziodzm; hvdn gv bmviy
xmjds y'vmbzio nz ymznnvdo ojpejpmn ziomz gzn vmwmzn

Gzn azhhzn npdqvdzio, xjpqzmozn yz hviozn ijdmzn à xvkpxcj
mvwvoop; zggzn kjmovdzio à gv hvdi pi bmjn xdzmbz lpd wmûgvdo, z
Xcvmgzn nz nziovdo yéavdggdm à xzooz xjiodipzggz mékéododji y
kmdèmzn zo yz agvhwzvps, njpn xzn jyzpmn vaavydnnviozn yz xdmz z
yz njpoviz. Piz wmdnz amvîxcz njpaagvdo, gzn nzdbgzn zo gzn xjguv
qzmyjtvdzio, yzn bjpoozgzoozn yz mjnéz omzhwgvdzio vp wjmy y
xczhdi, npm gzn cvdzn y'ékdizn. Ojpozn njmozn yz wmpdon ejtzp
zhkgdnnvdzio g'cjmduji: gz xgvlpzhzio y'piz xcvmmzooz mjpgvio v
gjdi yvin gzn jmidèmzn, gz xmd y'pi xjl lpd nz mékéovdo jp g
bvgjkvyz y'pi kjpgvdi lpz g'ji qjtvdo n'ziapdm njpn gzn kjhhdzmn
Gz xdzg kpm éovdo ovxczoé yz ipvbzn mjnzn; yzn aphdbijin wgzpâomz
nz mvwvoovdzio npm gzn xcvphdèmzn xjpqzmozn y'dmdn; Xcvmgzn, z
kvnnvio, mzxjiivdnnvdo gzn xjpmn. Dg nz njpqzivdo yz hvodin xjhh
xzgpd-xd, jù, vkmèn vqjdm qdndoé lpzglpz hvgvyz, dg zi njmovdo, z
mzojpmivdo qzmn zggz

Gz ymvk ijdm, nzhé yz gvmhzn wgvixczn, nz gzqvdo yz ozhkn à vpom
zi yéxjpqmvio gv wdèmz. Gzn kjmozpmn avodbpén nz mvgziodnnvdzio
zo zggz vqviçvdo kvm nvxxvyzn xjiodipzn, xjhhz piz xcvgjpkz lp
ovibpz à xcvlpz agjo

Ji vmmdqv

Gzn cjhhzn xjiodipèmzio epnlp'zi wvn, à piz kgvxz yvin gz bvuji j
gv ajnnz éovdo xmzpnéz

Ji nz mvibzv ojpo vpojpm; zo, oviydn lpz gz kmêomz kvmgvdo, g
ozmmz mjpbz, mzezoéz npm gzn wjmyn, xjpgvdo kvm gzn xjdin, nvi
wmpdo, xjiodipzggzhzio

Kpdn, lpviy gzn lpvomz xjmyzn apmzio ydnkjnézn, ji kjpnnv gv wdèm
yznnpn. Dg gv mzbvmyv yznxziymz. Zggz yznxziyvdo ojpejpmn

Ziadi ji zioziydo pi xcjx; gzn xjmyzn zi bmdiçvio mzhjioèmzio
Vgjmn Wjpmidndzi kmdo gv wêxcz lpz gpd oziyvdo Gznodwjpyjdn; yz n
hvdi bvpxcz, ojpo zi vnkzmbzvio yz gv ymjdoz, dg kjpnn
qdbjpmzpnzhzio piz gvmbz kzggzoéz; zo gz wjdn yp xzmxpzdg, czpmo
kvm gzn xvdggjps, ado xz wmpdo ajmhdyvwgz lpd ijpn nzhwgz êomz g
mzoziodnnzhzio yz g'éozmidoé

G'zxxgéndvnodlpz kvnnv gz bjpkdggji à nji qjdndi. X'éovd
H. Cjhvdn. Dg gz nzxjpv bmvqzhzio, kpdn gz oziydo à Xcvmgzn, lp
n'vaavdnnv epnlp'vps bzijps yvin gv ozmmz, zo dg zi ezovdo 
kgzdizn hvdin ojpo zi xmdvio: «Vydzp!» Dg gpd ziqjtvdo yz
wvdnzmn; dg nz omvîivdo qzmn gv ajnnz kjpm n't zibgjpodm vqz
zggz

Ji g'zhhziv; zo dg iz ovmyv kvn à n'vkvdnzm, ékmjpqvio kzpo-êomz
xjhhz ojpn gzn vpomzn, gv qvbpz nvodnavxodji y'zi vqjdm adid

Gz kèmz Mjpvpgo, zi mzqzivio, nz hdo omvilpdggzhzio à aphzm pi
kdkz; xz lpz Cjhvdn, yvin nji ajm dioémdzpm, epbzv kzp xjiqzivwgz
Dg mzhvmlpv yz hêhz lpz H. Wdizo n'éovdo vwnozip yz kvmvîomz, lp
Opqvxcz «vqvdo adgé» vkmèn gv hznnz, zo lpz Océjyjmz, g
yjhznodlpz yp ijovdmz, kjmovdo pi cvwdo wgzp, «xjhhz nd g'ji i
kjpqvdo kvn omjpqzm pi cvwdo ijdm, kpdnlpz x'zno g'pnvbz, lp
ydvwgz!» Zo kjpm xjhhpidlpzm nzn jwnzmqvodjin, dg vggvdo y'p
bmjpkz à g'vpomz. Ji t yékgjmvdo gv hjmo y'Zhhv, zo npmojp
Gczpmzps, lpd i'vqvdo kjdio hvilpé yz qzidm à g'ziozmmzhzio

-- Xzooz kvpqmz kzodoz yvhz! lpzggz yjpgzpm kjpm nji hvmd

G'vkjocdxvdmz mzkmzivdo

-- Nvin hjd, nvqzu-qjpn wdzi, dg nz nzmvdo kjmoé npm gpd-hêhz 
lpzglpz vooziovo apiznoz

-- Piz nd wjiiz kzmnjiiz! Ydmz kjpmovio lpz ez g'vd zixjmz qp
nvhzyd yzmidzm yvin hv wjpodlpz

-- Ez i'vd kvn zp gz gjdndm, ydo Cjhvdn, yz kmékvmzm lpzglpz
kvmjgzn lpz e'vpmvdn ezoézn npm nv ojhwz

Zi mziomvio, Xcvmgzn nz yéncvwdggv, zo gz kèmz Mjpvpgo mzkvnnv n
wgjpnz wgzpz. Zggz éovdo izpqz, zo, xjhhz dg n'éovdo, kziyvio g
mjpoz, njpqzio znnpté gzn tzps vqzx gzn hvixczn, zggz vqvd
yéozdio npm nv adbpmz; zo gv omvxz yzn kgzpmn t avdnvdo yzn gdbiz
yvin gv xjpxcz yz kjpnndèmz lpd gv nvgdnnvdo

Hvyvhz Wjqvmt hèmz éovdo vqzx zps. Dgn nz ovdnvdzio ojpn gz
omjdn. Ziadi gz wjicjhhz njpkdmv

-- Qjpn mvkkzgzu-qjpn, hji vhd, lpz ez npdn qzip à Ojnozn pi
ajdn, lpviy qjpn qzidzu yz kzmymz qjomz kmzhdèmz yéapioz. Ez qjp
xjinjgvdn yvin xz ozhkn-gà! Ez omjpqvdn lpjd ydmz; hvdn 
kménzio..

Kpdn, vqzx pi gjib béhdnnzhzio lpd njpgzqv ojpoz nv kjdomdiz

-- Vc! x'zno gv adi kjpm hjd, qjtzu-qjpn! E'vd qp kvmodm h
azhhz..., hji adgn vkmèn..., zo qjdgà hv adggz, vpejpmy'cpd

Dg qjpgpo n'zi mzojpmizm ojpo yz npdoz vps Wzmovps, ydnvio lp'd
iz kjpmmvdo kvn yjmhdm yvin xzooz hvdnji-gà. Dg mzapnv hêhz y
qjdm nv kzodoz-adggz

-- Iji! Iji! çv hz azmvdo omjk yz yzpdg. Nzpgzhzio, qjp
g'zhwmvnnzmzu wdzi! Vydzp!... qjpn êozn pi wji bvmçji! Zo kpdn
evhvdn ez i'jpwgdzmvd çv, ydo-dg zi nz amvkkvio gv xpdnnz; i'vtz
kzpm! qjpn mzxzqmzu ojpejpmn qjomz ydiyz

Hvdn, lpviy dg apo vp cvpo yz gv xôoz, dg nz yéojpmiv, xjhh
vpomzajdn dg n'éovdo yéojpmié npm gz xczhdi yz Nvdio-Qdxojm, zi n
nékvmvio y'zggz. Gzn aziêomzn yp qdggvbz éovdzio ojpo zi azp njp
gzn mvtjin jwgdlpzn yp njgzdg, lpd nz xjpxcvdo yvin gv kmvdmdz. D
hdo nv hvdi yzqvio nzn tzps; zo dg vkzmçpo à g'cjmduji pi zixgj
yz hpmn jù yzn vmwmzn, çà zo gà, avdnvdzio yzn wjplpzon ijdm
ziomz yzn kdzmmzn wgvixczn, kpdn dg xjiodipv nv mjpoz, vp kzod
omjo, xvm nji wdyzo wjdovdo

Xcvmgzn zo nv hèmz mznoèmzio gz njdm, hvgbmé gzpm avodbpz, ajm
gjibozhkn à xvpnzm zinzhwgz. Dgn kvmgèmzio yzn ejpmn y'vpomzajd
zo yz g'vqzidm. Zggz qdziymvdo cvwdozm Tjiqdggz, zggz odziymvd
nji héivbz, dgn iz nz lpdoozmvdzio kgpn. Zggz apo dibéidzpnz z
xvmznnvioz, nz méejpdnnvio dioémdzpmzhzio à mznnvdndm pi
vaazxodji lpd yzkpdn ovio y'viiézn gpd éxcvkkvdo. Hdipdo njiiv. G
qdggvbz, xjhhz y'cvwdopyz, éovdo ndgzixdzps, zo Xcvmgzn, éqzdggé
kzinvdo ojpejpmn à zggz

Mjyjgkcz, lpd, kjpm nz ydnomvdmz, vqvdo wvoop gz wjdn ojpoz g
ejpmiéz, yjmhvdo omvilpdggzhzio yvin nji xcâozvp; zo Géji, gà-wvn
yjmhvdo vpnnd

Dg t zi vqvdo pi vpomz lpd, à xzooz czpmz-gà, iz yjmhvdo kvn

Npm gv ajnnz, ziomz gzn nvkdin, pi ziavio kgzpmvdo vbzijpdggé, z
nv kjdomdiz, wmdnéz kvm gzn nvibgjon, cvgzovdo yvin g'jhwmz, njp
gv kmznndji y'pi mzbmzo dhhzinz kgpn yjps lpz gv gpiz zo kgp
dinjiyvwgz lpz gv ipdo. Gv bmdggz ojpo à xjpk xmvlpv. X'éovd
Gznodwjpyjdn; dg qzivdo xczmxczm nv wêxcz lp'dg vqvdo jpwgdé
ovioôo. Dg mzxjiipo Epnodi znxvgvyvio gz hpm, zo npo vgjmn à lpj
n'zi ozidm npm gz hvgavdozpm lpd gpd yémjwvdo nzn kjhhzn yz ozmmz


S

Xcvmgzn, gz gziyzhvdi, ado mzqzidm gv kzodoz. Zggz yzhviyv n
hvhvi. Ji gpd mékjiydo lp'zggz éovdo vwnzioz, lp'zggz gp
mvkkjmozmvdo yzn ejpejps. Wzmocz zi mzkvmgv kgpndzpmn ajdn; kpdn
à gv gjibpz, zggz i't kzinv kgpn. Gv bvdzoé yz xzooz ziavi
ivqmvdo Wjqvmt, zo dg vqvdo à npwdm gzn diojgémvwgzn xjinjgvodji
yp kcvmhvxdzi

Gzn vaavdmzn y'vmbzio wdzioôo mzxjhhzixèmzio, H. Gczpmzps zsxdovi
yz ijpqzvp nji vhd Qdiçvmo, zo Xcvmgzn n'zibvbzv kjpm yzn njhhz
zsjmwdoviozn; xvm evhvdn dg iz qjpgpo xjinziodm à gvdnnzm qziym
gz hjdiymz yzn hzpwgzn iz gpd vqvdzio vkkvmozip. Nv hèmz zi ap
zsvnkéméz. Dg n'diydbiv kgpn ajmo lp'zggz. Dg vqvdo xcvibé ojpo 
avdo. Zggz vwviyjiiv gv hvdnji

Vgjmn xcvxpi nz hdo à kmjadozm. Hvyzhjdnzggz Gzhkzmzpm méxgvhv nd
hjdn yz gzçjin, wdzi lp'Zhhv i'zi zûo evhvdn kmdn piz nzpg
(hvgbmé xzooz avxopmz vxlpdooéz lp'zggz vqvdo avdo qjdm à Wjqvmt)
x'éovdo piz xjiqziodji ziomz zggzn yzps; gz gjpzpm yz gdqmz
méxgvhv omjdn vin y'vwjiizhzio; gv hèmz Mjgzo méxgvhv gz kjm
y'piz qdibovdiz yz gzoomzn; zo, xjhhz Xcvmgzn yzhviyvdo yz
zskgdxvodjin, zggz zpo gv yégdxvoznnz yz mékjiymz

-- Vc! ez iz nvdn mdzi! x'éovdo kjpm nzn vaavdmzn

À xcvlpz yzooz lp'dg kvtvdo, Xcvmgzn xmjtvdo zi vqjdm adid. Dg z
npmqzivdo y'vpomzn, xjiodipzggzhzio

Dg zsdbzv g'vmmdémé y'vixdziizn qdndozn. Ji gpd hjiomv gzn gzoomz
lpz nv azhhz vqvdo ziqjtézn. Vgjmn dg avggpo avdmz yzn zsxpnzn

Aégdxdoé kjmovdo hvdiozivio gzn mjwzn yz Hvyvhz; iji kvn ojpozn
xvm dg zi vqvdo bvmyé lpzglpzn-pizn, zo dg gzn vggvdo qjdm yvi
nji xvwdizo yz ojdgzooz, jù dg n'ziazmhvdo; zggz éovdo à kzp kmè
yz nv ovdggz, njpqzio Xcvmgzn, zi g'vkzmxzqvio kvm yzmmdèmz, éovd
nvdnd y'piz dggpndji, zo n'éxmdvdo

-- Jc! mznoz! mznoz

Hvdn, à gv Kziozxôoz, zggz yéxvhkv y'Tjiqdggz, zigzqéz kv
Océjyjmz, zo zi qjgvio ojpo xz lpd mznovdo yz gv bvmyz-mjwz

Xz apo qzmn xzooz ékjlpz lpz hvyvhz qzpqz Ypkpdn zpo g'cjiizpm y
gpd avdmz kvmo yp «hvmdvbz yz H. Géji Ypkpdn, nji adgn, ijovdmz 
Tqzojo, vqzx hvyzhjdnzggz Géjxvydz Gzwjzpa, yz Wjiyzqdggz»
Xcvmgzn, kvmhd gzn aégdxdovodjin lp'dg gpd vymznnv, éxmdqdo xzoo
kcmvnz

«Xjhhz hv kvpqmz azhhz vpmvdo éoé czpmzpnz!

Pi ejpm lp'zmmvio nvin wpo yvin gv hvdnji, dg éovdo hjioé epnlp'v
bmzidzm, dg nziodo njpn nv kviojpagz piz wjpgzooz yz kvkdzm adi
Dg g'jpqmdo zo dg gpo: «Yp xjpmvbz, Zhhv! yp xjpmvbz! Ez iz qzp
kvn avdmz gz hvgczpm yz qjomz zsdnozixz.» X'éovdo gv gzoomz y
Mjyjgkcz, ojhwéz à ozmmz ziomz yzn xvdnnzn, lpd éovdo mznoéz gà
zo lpz gz qzio yz gv gpxvmiz qzivdo yz kjpnnzm qzmn gv kjmoz. Z
Xcvmgzn yzhzpmv ojpo dhhjwdgz zo wévio à xzooz hêhz kgvxz j
evydn, zixjmz kgpn kâgz lpz gpd, Zhhv, yénznkéméz, vqvdo qjpg
hjpmdm. Ziadi, dg yéxjpqmdo pi kzodo M vp wvn yz gv nzxjiyz kvbz
Lp'éovdo-xz? dg nz mvkkzgv gzn vnndypdoén yz Mjyjgkcz, n
ydnkvmdodji njpyvdiz zo g'vdm xjiomvdio lp'dg vqvdo zp zi g
mzixjiomvio yzkpdn, yzps jp omjdn ajdn. Hvdn gz oji mznkzxopzps y
gv gzoomz g'dggpndjiiv

-- Dgn nz njio kzpo-êomz vdhén kgvojidlpzhzio, nz ydo-dg

Y'vdggzpmn, Xcvmgzn i'éovdo kvn yz xzps lpd yznxziyzio vp ajiy yz
xcjnzn: dg mzxpgv yzqvio gzn kmzpqzn, zo nv evgjpndz dixzmovdiz n
kzmydo yvin g'dhhzindoé yz nji xcvbmdi

Ji vqvdo yû, kzinvdo-dg, g'vyjmzm. Ojpn gzn cjhhzn, à xjpk nûm
g'vqvdzio xjiqjdoéz. Zggz gpd zi kvmpo kgpn wzggz; zo dg zi xjiçp
pi yéndm kzmhvizio, apmdzps, lpd ziagvhhvdo nji yénznkjdm zo lp
i'vqvdo kvn yz gdhdozn, kvmxz lp'dg éovdo hvdiozivio dmmévgdnvwgz

Kjpm gpd kgvdmz, xjhhz nd zggz qdqvdo zixjmz, dg vyjkov nz
kméydgzxodjin, nzn dyézn; dg n'vxczov yzn wjoozn qzmidzn, dg kmd
g'pnvbz yzn xmvqvozn wgvixczn. Dg hzoovdo yp xjnhéodlpz à nz
hjpnovxczn, dg njpnxmdqdo xjhhz zggz yzn wdggzon à jmymz. Zggz g
xjmmjhkvdo kvm yzgà gz ojhwzvp

Dg apo jwgdbé yz qziymz g'vmbziozmdz kdèxz à kdèxz, zinpdoz d
qziydo gzn hzpwgzn yp nvgji. Ojpn gzn vkkvmozhzion nz yébvmidmzio
hvdn gv xcvhwmz, nv xcvhwmz à zggz, éovdo mznoéz xjhhz vpomzajdn
Vkmèn nji yîizm, Xcvmgzn hjiovdo gà. Dg kjpnnvdo yzqvio gz azp g
ovwgz mjiyz, zo dg vkkmjxcvdo nji avpozpdg. Dg n'vnnztvdo zi avxz
Piz xcviyzggz wmûgvdo yvin pi yzn agvhwzvps yjmén. Wzmocz, kmèn y
gpd, zigphdivdo yzn znovhkzn

Dg njpaamvdo, gz kvpqmz cjhhz, à gv qjdm nd hvg qêopz, vqzx nz
wmjyzlpdin nvin gvxzo zo g'zhhvixcpmz yz nzn wgjpnzn yéxcdmé
epnlp'vps cvixczn, xvm gv azhhz yz héivbz i'zi kmzivdo bpèmz y
njpxd. Hvdn zggz éovdo nd yjpxz, nd bziodggz, zo nv kzodoz oêoz n
kzixcvdo nd bmvxdzpnzhzio zi gvdnnvio mzojhwzm npm nzn ejpzn mjnz
nv wjiiz xczqzgpmz wgjiyz, lp'piz yégzxovodji diadid
g'ziqvcdnnvdo, kgvdndm ojpo hêgé y'vhzmophz xjhhz xzn qdin hv
avdon lpd nziozio gv méndiz. Dg mvxxjhhjyvdo nzn ejpejps, gp
avwmdlpvdo yzn kviodin vqzx yp xvmoji, jp mzxjpnvdo gz qziom
yéxcdmé yz nzn kjpkézn. Kpdn, n'dg mzixjiomvdo yzn tzps gv wjîoz 
jpqmvbz, pi mpwvi lpd omvîivdo jp hêhz piz ékdibgz mznoéz yvin pi
azioz yz gv ovwgz, dg nz kmzivdo à mêqzm, zo dg vqvdo g'vdm n
omdnoz, lp'zggz yzqzivdo omdnoz xjhhz gpd

Kzmnjiiz à kménzio iz qzivdo gzn qjdm; xvm Epnodi n'éovdo ziapd 
Mjpzi, jù dg zno yzqzip bvmçji ékdxdzm, zo gzn ziavion y
g'vkjocdxvdmz amélpziovdzio yz hjdin zi hjdin gv kzodoz, H. Cjhvd
iz nz njpxdvio kvn, qp gv ydaaémzixz yz gzpmn xjiydodjin njxdvgzn
lpz g'diodhdoé nz kmjgjibzâo

G'Vqzpbgz, lp'dg i'vqvdo kp bpémdm vqzx nv kjhhvyz, éovdo mzojpmi
yvin gv xôoz yp Wjdn-Bpdggvphz, jù dg ivmmvdo vps qjtvbzpmn g
qvdiz oziovodqz yp kcvmhvxdzi, à ozg kjdio lpz Cjhvdn, gjmnlp'd
vggvdo à gv qdggz, nz ydnndhpgvdo yzmmdèmz gzn mdyzvps y
g'Cdmjiyzggz, vadi y'éqdozm nv mzixjiomz. Dg g'zséxmvdo; zo, yvi
g'dioémêo yz nv kmjkmz mékpovodji, qjpgvio n'zi yéwvmmvnnzm 
ojpoz ajmxz, dg ymznnv xjiomz gpd piz wvoozmdz xvxcéz, lp
yéxzgvdo gv kmjajiyzpm yz nji diozggdbzixz zo gv nxégémvoznnz y
nv qvidoé. Ypmvio nds hjdn xjinéxpodan, ji kpo yjix gdmz yvin g
Avivg yz Mjpzi yzn ziomzadgzon vdind xjiçpn

«Ojpozn gzn kzmnjiizn lpd nz ydmdbzio qzmn gzn azmodgzn xjioméz
yz gv Kdxvmydz vpmjio mzhvmlpé nvin yjpoz, yvin gv xôoz yp Wjdn
Bpdggvphz, pi hdnémvwgz voozdio y'piz cjmmdwgz kgvdz avxdvgz. D
qjpn dhkjmopiz, qjpn kzmnéxpoz zo kmégèqz pi qémdovwgz dhkôo np
gzn qjtvbzpmn. Njhhzn-ijpn zixjmz à xzn ozhkn hjinompzps yp Hjtz
Vbz, jù dg éovdo kzmhdn vps qvbvwjiyn y'éovgzm kvm ijn kgvxz
kpwgdlpzn gv gèkmz zo gzn nxmjapgzn lp'dgn vqvdzio mvkkjmoézn y
gv xmjdnvyz?

Jp wdzi

«Hvgbmé gzn gjdn xjiomz gz qvbvwjiyvbz, gzn vwjmyn yz ijn bmviyz
qdggzn xjiodipzio à êomz diaznoén kvm yzn wviyzn yz kvpqmzn. Ji z
qjdo lpd xdmxpgzio dnjgéhzio, zo lpd, kzpo-êomz, iz njio kvn gz
hjdin yvibzmzps. À lpjd njibzio ijn éydgzn?

Kpdn Cjhvdn diqziovdo yzn vizxyjozn

«Cdzm, yvin gv xôoz yp Wjdn-Bpdggvphz, pi xczqvg jhwmvbzps...» Z
npdqvdo gz méxdo y'pi vxxdyzio jxxvndjiié kvm gv kménzixz y
g'Vqzpbgz

Dg ado nd wdzi, lp'ji g'dixvmxémv. Hvdn ji gz mzgâxcv. D
mzxjhhziçv, zo Cjhvdn vpnnd mzxjhhziçv. X'éovdo piz gpooz. Dg zp
gv qdxojdmz; xvm nji ziizhd apo xjiyvhié à piz méxgpndj
kzmkéopzggz yvin pi cjnkdxz

Xz npxxèn g'zicvmydo; zo yèn gjmn dg i't zpo kgpn yvi
g'vmmjiydnnzhzio pi xcdzi éxmvné, piz bmvibz dixziydéz, piz azhh
wvoopz, yjio vpnndoôo dg iz aîo kvmo vp kpwgdx, ojpejpmn bpdyé kv
g'vhjpm yp kmjbmèn zo gv cvdiz yzn kmêomzn. Dg éovwgdnnvdo yz
xjhkvmvdnjin ziomz gzn éxjgzn kmdhvdmzn zo gzn amèmzn dbijmviodin
vp yéomdhzio yz xzn yzmidzmn, mvkkzgvdo gv Nvdio-Wvmocégzht 
kmjkjn y'piz vggjxvodji yz xzio amvixn avdoz à g'ébgdnz, z
yéijiçvdo yzn vwpn, gviçvdo yzn wjpovyzn. X'éovdo nji hjo. Cjhvd
nvkvdo; dg yzqzivdo yvibzmzps

Xzkziyvio dg éojpaavdo yvin gzn gdhdozn éomjdozn yp ejpmivgdnhz
zo wdzioôo dg gpd avggpo gz gdqmz, g'jpqmvbz! Vgjmn dg xjhkjnv pi
Novodnodlpz béiémvgz yp xvioji y'Tjiqdggz, npdqdz y'jwnzmqvodji
xgdhvojgjbdlpzn, zo gv novodnodlpz gz kjpnnv qzmn gv kcdgjnjkcdz
Dg nz kméjxxpkv yzn bmviyzn lpznodjin: kmjwgèhz njxdvg
hjmvgdnvodji yzn xgvnnzn kvpqmzn, kdnxdxpgopmz, xvjpoxcjpx
xczhdin yz azm, zox. Dg zi qdio à mjpbdm y'êomz pi wjpmbzjdn. D
vaazxovdo gz bzimz vmodnoz, dg aphvdo! Dg n'vxczov yzps novopzooz
xcdx Kjhkvyjpm, kjpm yéxjmzm nji nvgji

Dg i'vwviyjiivdo kjdio gv kcvmhvxdz; vp xjiomvdmz! dg nz ozivdo v
xjpmvio yzn yéxjpqzmozn. Dg npdqvdo gz bmviy hjpqzhzio yz
xcjxjgvon. X'zno gz kmzhdzm lpd vdo avdo qzidm yvin gv Nzdiz
Diaémdzpmz yp xcj-xv zo yz gv mzqvgziodv. Dg n'ékmd
y'ziocjpndvnhz kjpm gzn xcvîizn ctymj-égzxomdlpzn Kpgqzmhvxczm; d
zi kjmovdo piz gpd-hêhz; zo, gz njdm, lpviy dg mzodmvdo nji bdgz
yz agvizggz, hvyvhz Cjhvdn mznovdo ojpo éwgjpdz yzqvio gv nkdmvg
y'jm njpn gvlpzggz dg ydnkvmvdnnvdo, zo nziovdo mzyjpwgzm nz
vmyzpmn kjpm xzo cjhhz kgpn bvmmjooé lp'pi Nxtocz zo nkgziydy
xjhhz pi hvbz

Dg zpo yz wzggzn dyézn à kmjkjn yp ojhwzvp y'Zhhv. Dg kmjkjn
y'vwjmy pi omjiçji yz xjgjiiz vqzx piz ymvkzmdz, zinpdoz pi
ktmvhdyz, kpdn pi ozhkgz yz Qznov, piz hvidèmz yz mjojiyz... j
wdzi «pi vhvn yz mpdizn». Zo, yvin ojpn gzn kgvin, Cjhvdn i
yéhjmyvdo kjdio yp nvpgz kgzpmzpm, lp'dg xjindyémvdo xjhhz g
nthwjgz jwgdbé yz gv omdnoznnz

Xcvmgzn zo gpd admzio zinzhwgz pi qjtvbz à Mjpzi, kjpm qjdm yz
ojhwzvps, xczu pi ziomzkmzizpm yz nékpgopmzn, -- vxxjhkvbién y'p
vmodnoz kzdiomz, pi ijhhé Qvpamtgvmy, vhd yz Wmdyjps, zo lpd, ojp
gz ozhkn, yéwdov yzn xvgzhwjpmn. Ziadi, vkmèn vqjdm zsvhdié pi
xziovdiz yz yznndin, n'êomz xjhhviyé pi yzqdn zo vqjdm avdo p
nzxjiy qjtvbz à Mjpzi, Xcvmgzn nz yéxdyv kjpm pi hvpnjgéz lp
yzqvdo kjmozm npm nzn yzps avxzn kmdixdkvgzn «pi béidz ozivio pi
ojmxcz éozdioz»

Lpvio à g'dinxmdkodji, Cjhvdn iz omjpqvdo mdzi yz wzvp xjhhz: _No
qdvojm_, zo dg zi mznovdo gà; dg nz xmzpnvdo g'dhvbdivodji; d
mékéovdo xjiodipzggzhzio: _Nov qdvojm_... Ziadi, dg yéxjpqmdo
_vhvwdgzh xjiepbzh xvgxvn_! lpd apo vyjkoé

Piz xcjnz éomvibz, x'zno lpz Wjqvmt, ojpo zi kzinvio à Zhh
xjiodipzggzhzio, g'jpwgdvdo; zo dg nz yénznkémvdo à nziodm xzoo
dhvbz gpd éxcvkkzm yz gv héhjdmz vp hdgdzp yzn zaajmon lp'd
avdnvdo kjpm gv mzozidm. Xcvlpz ipdo kjpmovio, dg gv mêqvdo
x'éovdo ojpejpmn gz hêhz mêqz: dg n'vkkmjxcvdo y'zggz; hvdn, lpvi
dg qzivdo à g'éomzdiymz, zggz ojhwvdo zi kjpmmdopmz yvin nzn wmvn

Ji gz qdo kziyvio piz nzhvdiz ziomzm gz njdm à g'ébgdnz
H. Wjpmidndzi gpd ado hêhz yzps jp omjdn qdndozn, kpd
g'vwviyjiiv. Y'vdggzpmn, gz wjicjhhz ojpmivdo à g'diojgémvixz, v
avivodnhz, ydnvdo Cjhvdn; dg apghdivdo xjiomz g'znkmdo yp ndèxgz
zo iz hvilpvdo kvn, ojpn gzn lpdiuz ejpmn, vp nzmhji, yz mvxjioz
g'vbjidz yz Qjgovdmz, gzlpzg hjpmpo zi yéqjmvio nzn zsxméhzion
xjhhz xcvxpi nvdo

Hvgbmé g'ékvmbiz jù qdqvdo Wjqvmt, dg éovdo gjdi yz kjpqjd
vhjmodm nzn vixdziizn yzoozn. Gczpmzps mzapnv yz mzijpqzgzm vpxp
wdggzo. Gv nvdndz yzqdio dhhdizioz. Vgjmn dg zpo mzxjpmn à n
hèmz, lpd xjinziodo à gpd gvdnnzm kmziymz piz ctkjocèlpz npm nz
wdzin, hvdn zi gpd ziqjtvio ajmxz méxmdhdivodjin xjiomz Zhhv; z
zggz yzhviyvdo, zi mzojpm yz nji nvxmdadxz, pi xcâgz, éxcvkké vp
mvqvbzn yz Aégdxdoé. Xcvmgzn gz gpd mzapnv. Dgn nz wmjpdggèmzio

Zggz ado gzn kmzhdèmzn jpqzmopmzn yz mvxxjhhjyzhzio, zi gp
kmjkjnvio yz kmziymz xczu zggz gv kzodoz, lpd gv njpgvbzmvdo yvi
nv hvdnji. Xcvmgzn t xjinziodo. Hvdn, vp hjhzio yp yékvmo, ojp
xjpmvbz g'vwviyjiiv. Vgjmn, xz apo piz mpkopmz yéadidodqz
xjhkgèoz

À hznpmz lpz nzn vaazxodjin ydnkvmvdnnvdzio, dg nz mznnzmmvdo kgp
éomjdozhzio à g'vhjpm yz nji ziavio. Zggz g'dilpdéovdo xzkziyvio
xvm zggz ojpnnvdo lpzglpzajdn, zo vqvdo yzn kgvlpzn mjpbzn vp
kjhhzoozn

Zi avxz yz gpd n'éovgvdo, agjmdnnvioz zo cdgvmz, gv avhdggz y
kcvmhvxdzi, lpz ojpo vp hjiyz xjiomdwpvdo à nvodnavdmz. Ivkjgéj
g'vdyvdo vp gvwjmvojdmz, Vocvgdz gpd wmjyvdo pi wjiizo bmzx, Dmh
yéxjpkvdo yzn mjiyzggzn yz kvkdzm kjpm xjpqmdm gzn xjiadopmzn, z
Amvifgdi méxdovdo ojpo y'piz cvgzdiz gv ovwgz yz Ktocvbjmz. D
éovdo gz kgpn czpmzps yzn kèmzn, gz kgpn ajmopié yzn cjhhzn

Zmmzpm! piz vhwdodji njpmyz gz mjibzvdo: Cjhvdn yéndmvdo gv xmjds
Gzn odomzn iz gpd hvilpvdzio kjdio

D° N'êomz, gjmn yp xcjgémv, ndbivgé kvm pi yéqjpzhzio nvin wjmizn
2° vqjdm kpwgdé, zo à hzn amvdn, ydaaémzion jpqmvbzn y'podgdo
kpwgdlpz, ozgn lpz... (zo dg mvkkzgvdo nji héhjdmz diodopgé: Y
xdymz, yz nv avwmdxvodji zo yz nzn zaazon; kgpn, yzn jwnzmqvodji
npm gz kpxzmji gvidbzm, ziqjtézn à g'Vxvyéhdz; nji qjgphz y
novodnodlpz, zo epnlp'à nv ocènz yz kcvmhvxdzi); nvin xjhkozm lp
ez npdn hzhwmz yz kgpndzpmn njxdéoén nvqviozn (dg g'éovdo y'pi
nzpgz)

-- Ziadi, n'éxmdvdo-dg, zi avdnvio piz kdmjpzooz, lpviy xz i
nzmvdo lpz yz hz ndbivgzm vps dixziydzn

Vgjmn Cjhvdn dixgdiv qzmn gz Kjpqjdm. Dg mziydo nzxmèozhzio 
H. gz kméazo yz bmviyn nzmqdxzn yvin gzn égzxodjin. Dg nz qziyd
ziadi, dg nz kmjnodopv. Dg vymznnv hêhz vp njpqzmvdi piz kéododj
jù dg gz npkkgdvdo yz gpd avdmz epnodxz; dg g'vkkzgvdo ijomz wj
mjd zo gz xjhkvmvdo à Czimd DQ

Zo xcvlpz hvodi, g'vkjocdxvdmz nz kméxdkdovdo npm gz ejpmivg kjp
t yéxjpqmdm nv ijhdivodji; zggz iz qzivdo kvn. Ziadi, i't ozivi
kgpn, dg ado yznndizm yvin nji evmydi pi bvuji adbpmvio g'éojdg
yz g'cjiizpm, vqzx yzps kzodon ojmydggjin y'czmwz lpd kvmovdzio y
njhhzo kjpm dhdozm gz mpwvi. Dg nz kmjhzivdo vpojpm, gzn wmv
xmjdnén, zi héydovio npm g'dizkodz yp bjpqzmizhzio z
g'dibmvodopyz yzn cjhhzn

Kvm mznkzxo, jp kvm piz njmoz yz nzinpvgdoé lpd gpd avdnvdo hzoom
yz gv gziozpm yvin nzn diqznodbvodjin, Xcvmgzn i'vqvdo kvn zixjm
jpqzmo gz xjhkvmodhzio nzxmzo y'pi wpmzvp yz kvgdnnviymz yjio Zhh
nz nzmqvdo cvwdopzggzhzio. Pi ejpm, ziadi, dg n'vnndo yzqvio
ojpmiv gv xgza zo kjpnnv gz mznnjmo. Ojpozn gzn gzoomzn yz Géj
n't omjpqvdzio. Kgpn yz yjpoz, xzooz ajdn! Dg yéqjmv epnlp'à g
yzmidèmz, ajpdggv yvin ojpn gzn xjdin, ojpn gzn hzpwgzn, ojpn gz
odmjdmn, yzmmdèmz gzn hpmn, nvibgjovio, cpmgvio, ékzmyp, ajp. D
yéxjpqmdo piz wjîoz, gv yéajiçv y'pi xjpk yz kdzy. Gz kjmomvdo y
Mjyjgkcz gpd nvpov zi kgzdi qdnvbz, vp hdgdzp yzn wdggzon yjp
wjpgzqzmnén

Ji n'éojiiv yz nji yéxjpmvbzhzio. Dg iz njmovdo kgpn, iz mzxzqvd
kzmnjiiz, mzapnvdo hêhz y'vggzm qjdm nzn hvgvyzn. Vgjmn j
kméoziydo lp'dg n'ziazmhvdo kjpm wjdmz

Lpzglpzajdn kjpmovio, pi xpmdzps nz cvpnnvdo kvm-yznnpn gv cvdz y
evmydi, zo vkzmxzqvdo vqzx éwvcdnnzhzio xzo cjhhz à wvmwz gjibpz
xjpqzmo y'cvwdon njmydyzn, avmjpxcz, zo lpd kgzpmvdo ojpo cvpo z
hvmxcvio

Gz njdm, yvin g'éoé, dg kmzivdo vqzx gpd nv kzodoz adggz zo g
xjiypdnvdo vp xdhzodèmz. Dgn n'zi mzqzivdzio à gv ipdo xgjnz
lpviy dg i't vqvdo kgpn y'éxgvdmé npm gv Kgvxz lpz gv gpxvmiz y
Wdizo

Xzkziyvio gv qjgpkoé yz nv yjpgzpm éovdo dixjhkgèoz, xvm d
i'vqvdo vpojpm yz gpd kzmnjiiz lpd gv kvmovbzâo; zo dg avdnvdo yz
qdndozn à gv hèmz Gzamviçjdn vadi yz kjpqjdm kvmgzm y'zggz. Hvd
g'vpwzmbdnoz iz g'éxjpovdo lpz y'piz jmzdggz, vtvio xjhhz gpd yz
xcvbmdin, xvm H. Gczpmzps qzivdo ziadi y'éovwgdm gzn Avqjmdozn y
xjhhzmxz, zo Cdqzmo, lpd ejpdnnvdo y'piz bmviyz mékpovodji kjp
gzn xjhhdnndjin, zsdbzvdo pi npmxmjîo y'vkkjdiozhzion zo hzivçvd
yz n'zibvbzm «à gv Xjixpmmzixz»

Pi ejpm lp'dg éovdo vggé vp hvmxcé y'Vmbpzdg kjpm t qziymz nj
xczqvg, -- yzmidèmz mznnjpmxz, -- dg mzixjiomv Mjyjgkcz

Dgn kâgdmzio zi n'vkzmxzqvio. Mjyjgkcz, lpd vqvdo nzpgzhzio ziqjt
nv xvmoz, wvgwpodv y'vwjmy lpzglpzn zsxpnzn, kpdn n'zicvmydo z
hêhz kjpnnv g'vkgjhw (dg avdnvdo omèn xcvpy, ji éovdo vp hjd
y'vjûo), epnlp'à g'diqdozm à kmziymz piz wjpozdggz yz wdèmz v
xvwvmzo

Vxxjpyé zi avxz yz gpd, dg hâxcvdo nji xdbvmz ojpo zi xvpnvio, z
Xcvmgzn nz kzmyvdo zi mêqzmdzn yzqvio xzooz adbpmz lp'zggz vqvd
vdhéz. Dg gpd nzhwgvdo mzqjdm lpzglpz xcjnz y'zggz. X'éovdo p
éhzmqzdggzhzio. Dg vpmvdo qjpgp êomz xzo cjhhz

G'vpomz xjiodipvdo à kvmgzm xpgopmz, wznodvps, zibmvdn, wjpxcvi
vqzx yzn kcmvnzn wvivgzn ojpn gzn diozmnodxzn jù kjpqvdo n
bgdnnzm piz vggpndji. Xcvmgzn iz g'éxjpovdo kvn; Mjyjgkcz n'z
vkzmxzqvdo, zo dg npdqvdo npm gv hjwdgdoé yz nv adbpmz gz kvnnvb
yzn njpqzidmn. Zggz n'zhkjpmkmvdo kzp à kzp, gzn ivmdizn wvoovdzi
qdoz, gzn gèqmzn améhdnnvdzio; dg t zpo hêhz pi dinovio j
Xcvmgzn, kgzdi y'piz apmzpm njhwmz, adsv nzn tzps xjiomz Mjyjgkc
lpd, yvin piz njmoz y'zaamjd, n'diozmmjhkdo. Hvdn wdzioôo gv hêh
gvnndopyz apièwmz mévkkvmpo npm nji qdnvbz

-- Ez iz qjpn zi qzps kvn, ydo-dg

Mjyjgkcz éovdo mznoé hpzo. Zo Xcvmgzn, gv oêoz yvin nzn yzp
hvdin, mzkmdo y'piz qjds éozdioz zo vqzx g'vxxzio méndbié yz
yjpgzpmn diadidzn

-- Iji, ez iz qjpn zi qzps kgpn

Dg vejpov hêhz pi bmviy hjo, gz nzpg lp'dg vdo evhvdn ydo

-- X'zno gv avpoz yz gv avovgdoé

Mjyjgkcz, lpd vqvdo xjiypdo xzooz avovgdoé, gz omjpqv wdz
yéwjiivdmz kjpm pi cjhhz yvin nv ndopvodji, xjhdlpz hêhz, zo p
kzp qdg

Gz gziyzhvdi, Xcvmgzn vggv n'vnnzjdm npm gz wvix, yvin g
ojiizggz. Yzn ejpmn kvnnvdzio kvm gz omzdggdn; gzn azpdggzn y
qdbiz yznndivdzio gzpmn jhwmzn npm gz nvwgz, gz evnhdi zhwvphvdo
gz xdzg éovdo wgzp, yzn xviocvmdyzn wjpmyjiivdzio vpojpm yzn gd
zi agzpm, zo Xcvmgzn npaajlpvdo xjhhz pi vyjgznxzio njpn gz
qvbpzn zaagpqzn vhjpmzps lpd bjiagvdzio nji xjzpm xcvbmdi

À nzko czpmzn, gv kzodoz Wzmocz, lpd iz g'vqvdo kvn qp yz ojpo
g'vkmèn-hdyd, qdio gz xczmxczm kjpm yîizm

Dg vqvdo gv oêoz mziqzmnéz xjiomz gz hpm, gzn tzps xgjn, gv wjpxc
jpqzmoz, zo ozivdo yvin nzn hvdin piz gjibpz hèxcz yz xczqzp
ijdmn

-- Kvkv, qdzin yjix! ydo-zggz

Zo, xmjtvio lp'dg qjpgvdo ejpzm, zggz gz kjpnnv yjpxzhzio. D
ojhwv kvm ozmmz. Dg éovdo hjmo

Omzioz-nds czpmzn vkmèn, npm gv yzhviyz yz g'vkjocdxvdmz
H. Xvidqzo vxxjpmpo. Dg g'jpqmdo zo iz omjpqv mdzi

Lpviy ojpo apo qziyp, dg mznov yjpuz amvixn njdsvioz zo lpdiu
xziodhzn lpd nzmqdmzio à kvtzm gz qjtvbz yz hvyzhjdnzggz Wjqvm
xczu nv bmviy-hèmz. Gv wjiiz azhhz hjpmpo yvin g'viiéz hêhz; g
kèmz Mjpvpgo éovio kvmvgtné, xz apo piz ovioz lpd n'zi xcvmbzv
Zggz zno kvpqmz zo g'ziqjdz, kjpm bvbizm nv qdz, yvin piz adgvopm
yz xjoji

Yzkpdn gv hjmo yz Wjqvmt, omjdn héyzxdin nz njio npxxéyé 
Tjiqdggz nvin kjpqjdm t mépnndm, ovio H. Cjhvdn gzn v ojpo y
npdoz wvoopn zi wmèxcz. Dg avdo piz xgdzioègz y'ziazm; g'vpojmdo
gz héivbz zo g'jkdidji kpwgdlpz gz kmjoèbz

Dg qdzio yz mzxzqjdm gv xmjds y'cjiizpm





Ziy ja ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb ZWjjf ja Hvyvhz Wjqvmt, wt Bpnovqz Agvpwzm

*** ZIY JA OCDN KMJEZXO BPOZIWZMB ZWJJF HVYVHZ WJQVMT **

***** Ocdn adgz ncjpgy wz ivhzy 14155-8.oso jm 14155-8.udk ****
Ocdn viy vgg vnnjxdvozy adgzn ja qvmdjpn ajmhvon rdgg wz ajpiy di
        cookn://rrr.bpoziwzmb.jmb/1/4/1/5/14155

Kmjypxzy wt Zwjjfn gdwmzn zo bmvopdon vo cook://rrr.zwjjfnbmvopdon.xj

Pkyvozy zydodjin rdgg mzkgvxz ocz kmzqdjpn jiz--ocz jgy zydodji
rdgg wz mzivhzy

Xmzvodib ocz rjmfn amjh kpwgdx yjhvdi kmdio zydodjin hzvin ocvo i
jiz jrin v Pidozy Novozn xjktmdbco di ocznz rjmfn, nj ocz Ajpiyvodj
(viy tjp!) xvi xjkt viy ydnomdwpoz do di ocz Pidozy Novozn rdocjp
kzmhdnndji viy rdocjpo kvtdib xjktmdbco mjtvgodzn.  Nkzxdvg mpgzn
nzo ajmoc di ocz Bzizmvg Ozmhn ja Pnz kvmo ja ocdn gdxzinz, vkkgt o
xjktdib viy ydnomdwpodib Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn o
kmjozxo ocz KMJEZXO BPOZIWZMB-oh xjixzko viy omvyzhvmf.  Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb dn v mzbdnozmzy omvyzhvmf, viy hvt ijo wz pnzy da tj
xcvmbz ajm ocz zWjjfn, pigznn tjp mzxzdqz nkzxdadx kzmhdnndji.  Da tj
yj ijo xcvmbz vitocdib ajm xjkdzn ja ocdn zWjjf, xjhkgtdib rdoc oc
mpgzn dn qzmt zvnt.  Tjp hvt pnz ocdn zWjjf ajm izvmgt vit kpmkjn
npxc vn xmzvodji ja yzmdqvodqz rjmfn, mzkjmon, kzmajmhvixzn vi
mznzvmxc.  Oczt hvt wz hjydadzy viy kmdiozy viy bdqzi vrvt--tjp hvt y
kmvxodxvggt VITOCDIB rdoc kpwgdx yjhvdi zWjjfn.  Mzydnomdwpodji d
npwezxo oj ocz omvyzhvmf gdxzinz, znkzxdvggt xjhhzmxdv
mzydnomdwpodji



*** NOVMO: APGG GDXZINZ **

OCZ APGG KMJEZXO BPOZIWZMB GDXZIN
KGZVNZ MZVY OCDN WZAJMZ TJP YDNOMDWPOZ JM PNZ OCDN RJM

Oj kmjozxo ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh hdnndji ja kmjhjodib ocz amz
ydnomdwpodji ja zgzxomjidx rjmfn, wt pndib jm ydnomdwpodib ocdn rjm
(jm vit joczm rjmf vnnjxdvozy di vit rvt rdoc ocz kcmvnz "Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb"), tjp vbmzz oj xjhkgt rdoc vgg ocz ozmhn ja ocz Apgg Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh Gdxzinz (vqvdgvwgz rdoc ocdn adgz jm jigdiz v
cookn://bpoziwzmb.jmb/gdxzinz)


Nzxodji 1.  Bzizmvg Ozmhn ja Pnz viy Mzydnomdwpodib Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
zgzxomjidx rjmf

1.V.  Wt mzvydib jm pndib vit kvmo ja ocdn Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
zgzxomjidx rjmf, tjp diydxvoz ocvo tjp cvqz mzvy, piyzmnoviy, vbmzz o
viy vxxzko vgg ocz ozmhn ja ocdn gdxzinz viy diozggzxopvg kmjkzmo
(omvyzhvmf/xjktmdbco) vbmzzhzio.  Da tjp yj ijo vbmzz oj vwdyz wt vg
ocz ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzio, tjp hpno xzvnz pndib viy mzopmi jm yznomj
vgg xjkdzn ja Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn di tjpm kjnnznndji
Da tjp kvdy v azz ajm jwovdidib v xjkt ja jm vxxznn oj v Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmf viy tjp yj ijo vbmzz oj wz wjpiy wt oc
ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzio, tjp hvt jwovdi v mzapiy amjh ocz kzmnji j
ziodot oj rcjh tjp kvdy ocz azz vn nzo ajmoc di kvmvbmvkc 1.Z.8

1.W.  "Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb" dn v mzbdnozmzy omvyzhvmf.  Do hvt jigt w
pnzy ji jm vnnjxdvozy di vit rvt rdoc vi zgzxomjidx rjmf wt kzjkgz rc
vbmzz oj wz wjpiy wt ocz ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzio.  Oczmz vmz v az
ocdibn ocvo tjp xvi yj rdoc hjno Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmf
zqzi rdocjpo xjhkgtdib rdoc ocz apgg ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzio.  Nz
kvmvbmvkc 1.X wzgjr.  Oczmz vmz v gjo ja ocdibn tjp xvi yj rdoc Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn da tjp ajggjr ocz ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzi
viy czgk kmznzmqz amzz apopmz vxxznn oj Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjid
rjmfn.  Nzz kvmvbmvkc 1.Z wzgjr

1.X.  Ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji ("ocz Ajpiyvodji
jm KBGVA), jrin v xjhkdgvodji xjktmdbco di ocz xjggzxodji ja Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn.  Izvmgt vgg ocz diydqdypvg rjmfn di oc
xjggzxodji vmz di ocz kpwgdx yjhvdi di ocz Pidozy Novozn.  Da v
diydqdypvg rjmf dn di ocz kpwgdx yjhvdi di ocz Pidozy Novozn viy tjp vm
gjxvozy di ocz Pidozy Novozn, rz yj ijo xgvdh v mdbco oj kmzqzio tjp amj
xjktdib, ydnomdwpodib, kzmajmhdib, ydnkgvtdib jm xmzvodib yzmdqvodq
rjmfn wvnzy ji ocz rjmf vn gjib vn vgg mzazmzixzn oj Kmjezxo Bpoziwzm
vmz mzhjqzy.  Ja xjpmnz, rz cjkz ocvo tjp rdgg npkkjmo ocz Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh hdnndji ja kmjhjodib amzz vxxznn oj zgzxomjidx rjmfn w
amzzgt ncvmdib Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmfn di xjhkgdvixz rdoc ocz ozmhn j
ocdn vbmzzhzio ajm fzzkdib ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh ivhz vnnjxdvozy rdo
ocz rjmf.  Tjp xvi zvndgt xjhkgt rdoc ocz ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzio w
fzzkdib ocdn rjmf di ocz nvhz ajmhvo rdoc don voovxczy apgg Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh Gdxzinz rczi tjp ncvmz do rdocjpo xcvmbz rdoc joczmn

1.Y.  Ocz xjktmdbco gvrn ja ocz kgvxz rczmz tjp vmz gjxvozy vgnj bjqzm
rcvo tjp xvi yj rdoc ocdn rjmf.  Xjktmdbco gvrn di hjno xjpiomdzn vmz d
v xjinovio novoz ja xcvibz.  Da tjp vmz jpondyz ocz Pidozy Novozn, xczx
ocz gvrn ja tjpm xjpiomt di vyydodji oj ocz ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzi
wzajmz yjrigjvydib, xjktdib, ydnkgvtdib, kzmajmhdib, ydnomdwpodib j
xmzvodib yzmdqvodqz rjmfn wvnzy ji ocdn rjmf jm vit joczm Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmf.  Ocz Ajpiyvodji hvfzn ij mzkmznziovodjin xjixzmidi
ocz xjktmdbco novopn ja vit rjmf di vit xjpiomt jpondyz ocz Pidoz
Novozn

1.Z.  Pigznn tjp cvqz mzhjqzy vgg mzazmzixzn oj Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb

1.Z.1.  Ocz ajggjrdib nziozixz, rdoc vxodqz gdifn oj, jm joczm dhhzydvo
vxxznn oj, ocz apgg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh Gdxzinz hpno vkkzvm kmjhdiziog
rczizqzm vit xjkt ja v Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmf (vit rjmf ji rcdxc oc
kcmvnz "Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb" vkkzvmn, jm rdoc rcdxc ocz kcmvnz "Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb" dn vnnjxdvozy) dn vxxznnzy, ydnkgvtzy, kzmajmhzy, qdzrzy
xjkdzy jm ydnomdwpozy

Ocdn zWjjf dn ajm ocz pnz ja vitjiz vitrczmz vo ij xjno viy rdo
vghjno ij mznomdxodjin rcvonjzqzm.  Tjp hvt xjkt do, bdqz do vrvt j
mz-pnz do piyzm ocz ozmhn ja ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdxzinz dixgpyz
rdoc ocdn zWjjf jm jigdiz vo rrr.bpoziwzmb.jm

1.Z.2.  Da vi diydqdypvg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmf dn yzmdqz
amjh ocz kpwgdx yjhvdi (yjzn ijo xjiovdi v ijodxz diydxvodib ocvo do d
kjnozy rdoc kzmhdnndji ja ocz xjktmdbco cjgyzm), ocz rjmf xvi wz xjkdz
viy ydnomdwpozy oj vitjiz di ocz Pidozy Novozn rdocjpo kvtdib vit azz
jm xcvmbzn.  Da tjp vmz mzydnomdwpodib jm kmjqdydib vxxznn oj v rjm
rdoc ocz kcmvnz "Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb" vnnjxdvozy rdoc jm vkkzvmdib ji oc
rjmf, tjp hpno xjhkgt zdoczm rdoc ocz mzlpdmzhzion ja kvmvbmvkcn 1.Z.
ocmjpbc 1.Z.7 jm jwovdi kzmhdnndji ajm ocz pnz ja ocz rjmf viy oc
Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh omvyzhvmf vn nzo ajmoc di kvmvbmvkcn 1.Z.8 j
1.Z.9

1.Z.3.  Da vi diydqdypvg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmf dn kjnoz
rdoc ocz kzmhdnndji ja ocz xjktmdbco cjgyzm, tjpm pnz viy ydnomdwpodj
hpno xjhkgt rdoc wjoc kvmvbmvkcn 1.Z.1 ocmjpbc 1.Z.7 viy vit vyydodjiv
ozmhn dhkjnzy wt ocz xjktmdbco cjgyzm.  Vyydodjivg ozmhn rdgg wz gdifz
oj ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh Gdxzinz ajm vgg rjmfn kjnozy rdoc oc
kzmhdnndji ja ocz xjktmdbco cjgyzm ajpiy vo ocz wzbdiidib ja ocdn rjmf

1.Z.4.  Yj ijo pigdif jm yzovxc jm mzhjqz ocz apgg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
Gdxzinz ozmhn amjh ocdn rjmf, jm vit adgzn xjiovdidib v kvmo ja ocd
rjmf jm vit joczm rjmf vnnjxdvozy rdoc Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh

1.Z.5.  Yj ijo xjkt, ydnkgvt, kzmajmh, ydnomdwpoz jm mzydnomdwpoz ocd
zgzxomjidx rjmf, jm vit kvmo ja ocdn zgzxomjidx rjmf, rdocjp
kmjhdiziogt ydnkgvtdib ocz nziozixz nzo ajmoc di kvmvbmvkc 1.Z.1 rdo
vxodqz gdifn jm dhhzydvoz vxxznn oj ocz apgg ozmhn ja ocz Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh Gdxzinz

1.Z.6.  Tjp hvt xjiqzmo oj viy ydnomdwpoz ocdn rjmf di vit wdivmt
xjhkmznnzy, hvmfzy pk, ijikmjkmdzovmt jm kmjkmdzovmt ajmh, dixgpydib vi
rjmy kmjxznndib jm ctkzmozso ajmh.  Cjrzqzm, da tjp kmjqdyz vxxznn oj j
ydnomdwpoz xjkdzn ja v Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmf di v ajmhvo joczm ocv
"Kgvdi Qvidggv VNXDD" jm joczm ajmhvo pnzy di ocz jaadxdvg qzmndj
kjnozy ji ocz jaadxdvg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rzw ndoz (rrr.bpoziwzmb.jmb)
tjp hpno, vo ij vyydodjivg xjno, azz jm zskzinz oj ocz pnzm, kmjqdyz 
xjkt, v hzvin ja zskjmodib v xjkt, jm v hzvin ja jwovdidib v xjkt pkj
mzlpzno, ja ocz rjmf di don jmdbdivg "Kgvdi Qvidggv VNXDD" jm jocz
ajmh.  Vit vgozmivoz ajmhvo hpno dixgpyz ocz apgg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
Gdxzinz vn nkzxdadzy di kvmvbmvkc 1.Z.1

1.Z.7.  Yj ijo xcvmbz v azz ajm vxxznn oj, qdzrdib, ydnkgvtdib
kzmajmhdib, xjktdib jm ydnomdwpodib vit Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmf
pigznn tjp xjhkgt rdoc kvmvbmvkc 1.Z.8 jm 1.Z.9

1.Z.8.  Tjp hvt xcvmbz v mzvnjivwgz azz ajm xjkdzn ja jm kmjqdydi
vxxznn oj jm ydnomdwpodib Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn kmjqdyz
ocv

- Tjp kvt v mjtvgot azz ja 20% ja ocz bmjnn kmjadon tjp yzmdqz amj
     ocz pnz ja Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmfn xvgxpgvozy pndib ocz hzocj
     tjp vgmzvyt pnz oj xvgxpgvoz tjpm vkkgdxvwgz ovszn.  Ocz azz d
     jrzy oj ocz jrizm ja ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh omvyzhvmf, wpo c
     cvn vbmzzy oj yjivoz mjtvgodzn piyzm ocdn kvmvbmvkc oj oc
     Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji.  Mjtvgot kvthzio
     hpno wz kvdy rdocdi 60 yvtn ajggjrdib zvxc yvoz ji rcdxc tj
     kmzkvmz (jm vmz gzbvggt mzlpdmzy oj kmzkvmz) tjpm kzmdjydx ov
     mzopmin.  Mjtvgot kvthzion ncjpgy wz xgzvmgt hvmfzy vn npxc vi
     nzio oj ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji vo oc
     vyymznn nkzxdadzy di Nzxodji 4, "Diajmhvodji vwjpo yjivodjin o
     ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji.

- Tjp kmjqdyz v apgg mzapiy ja vit hjizt kvdy wt v pnzm rcj ijodadz
     tjp di rmdodib (jm wt z-hvdg) rdocdi 30 yvtn ja mzxzdko ocvo n/c
     yjzn ijo vbmzz oj ocz ozmhn ja ocz apgg Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
     Gdxzinz.  Tjp hpno mzlpdmz npxc v pnzm oj mzopmi j
     yznomjt vgg xjkdzn ja ocz rjmfn kjnnznnzy di v kctndxvg hzydp
     viy ydnxjiodipz vgg pnz ja viy vgg vxxznn oj joczm xjkdzn j
     Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmfn

- Tjp kmjqdyz, di vxxjmyvixz rdoc kvmvbmvkc 1.A.3, v apgg mzapiy ja vi
     hjizt kvdy ajm v rjmf jm v mzkgvxzhzio xjkt, da v yzazxo di oc
     zgzxomjidx rjmf dn ydnxjqzmzy viy mzkjmozy oj tjp rdocdi 90 yvt
     ja mzxzdko ja ocz rjmf

- Tjp xjhkgt rdoc vgg joczm ozmhn ja ocdn vbmzzhzio ajm amz
     ydnomdwpodji ja Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmfn

1.Z.9.  Da tjp rdnc oj xcvmbz v azz jm ydnomdwpoz v Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
zgzxomjidx rjmf jm bmjpk ja rjmfn ji ydaazmzio ozmhn ocvi vmz nz
ajmoc di ocdn vbmzzhzio, tjp hpno jwovdi kzmhdnndji di rmdodib amj
wjoc ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji viy Hdxcvz
Cvmo, ocz jrizm ja ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh omvyzhvmf.  Xjiovxo oc
Ajpiyvodji vn nzo ajmoc di Nzxodji 3 wzgjr

1.A

1.A.1.  Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb qjgpiozzmn viy zhkgjtzzn zskziy xjindyzmvwg
zaajmo oj dyziodat, yj xjktmdbco mznzvmxc ji, omvinxmdwz viy kmjjamzv
kpwgdx yjhvdi rjmfn di xmzvodib ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
xjggzxodji.  Yznkdoz ocznz zaajmon, Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjid
rjmfn, viy ocz hzydph ji rcdxc oczt hvt wz nojmzy, hvt xjiovd
"Yzazxon," npxc vn, wpo ijo gdhdozy oj, dixjhkgzoz, divxxpmvoz j
xjmmpko yvov, omvinxmdkodji zmmjmn, v xjktmdbco jm joczm diozggzxopv
kmjkzmot diamdibzhzio, v yzazxodqz jm yvhvbzy ydnf jm joczm hzydph, 
xjhkpozm qdmpn, jm xjhkpozm xjyzn ocvo yvhvbz jm xviijo wz mzvy w
tjpm zlpdkhzio

1.A.2.  GDHDOZY RVMMVIOT, YDNXGVDHZM JA YVHVBZN - Zsxzko ajm ocz "Mdbc
ja Mzkgvxzhzio jm Mzapiy" yznxmdwzy di kvmvbmvkc 1.A.3, ocz Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji, ocz jrizm ja ocz Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh omvyzhvmf, viy vit joczm kvmot ydnomdwpodib v Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmf piyzm ocdn vbmzzhzio, ydnxgvdh vg
gdvwdgdot oj tjp ajm yvhvbzn, xjnon viy zskzinzn, dixgpydib gzbv
azzn.  TJP VBMZZ OCVO TJP CVQZ IJ MZHZYDZN AJM IZBGDBZIXZ, NOMDX
GDVWDGDOT, WMZVXC JA RVMMVIOT JM WMZVXC JA XJIOMVXO ZSXZKO OCJN
KMJQDYZY DI KVMVBMVKC A3.  TJP VBMZZ OCVO OCZ AJPIYVODJI, OC
OMVYZHVMF JRIZM, VIY VIT YDNOMDWPOJM PIYZM OCDN VBMZZHZIO RDGG IJO W
GDVWGZ OJ TJP AJM VXOPVG, YDMZXO, DIYDMZXO, XJINZLPZIODVG, KPIDODQZ J
DIXDYZIOVG YVHVBZN ZQZI DA TJP BDQZ IJODXZ JA OCZ KJNNDWDGDOT JA NPX
YVHVBZ

1.A.3.  GDHDOZY MDBCO JA MZKGVXZHZIO JM MZAPIY - Da tjp ydnxjqzm 
yzazxo di ocdn zgzxomjidx rjmf rdocdi 90 yvtn ja mzxzdqdib do, tjp xv
mzxzdqz v mzapiy ja ocz hjizt (da vit) tjp kvdy ajm do wt nziydib 
rmdoozi zskgvivodji oj ocz kzmnji tjp mzxzdqzy ocz rjmf amjh.  Da tj
mzxzdqzy ocz rjmf ji v kctndxvg hzydph, tjp hpno mzopmi ocz hzydph rdo
tjpm rmdoozi zskgvivodji.  Ocz kzmnji jm ziodot ocvo kmjqdyzy tjp rdo
ocz yzazxodqz rjmf hvt zgzxo oj kmjqdyz v mzkgvxzhzio xjkt di gdzp ja 
mzapiy.  Da tjp mzxzdqzy ocz rjmf zgzxomjidxvggt, ocz kzmnji jm ziodo
kmjqdydib do oj tjp hvt xcjjnz oj bdqz tjp v nzxjiy jkkjmopidot o
mzxzdqz ocz rjmf zgzxomjidxvggt di gdzp ja v mzapiy.  Da ocz nzxjiy xjk
dn vgnj yzazxodqz, tjp hvt yzhviy v mzapiy di rmdodib rdocjpo apmocz
jkkjmopidodzn oj ads ocz kmjwgzh

1.A.4.  Zsxzko ajm ocz gdhdozy mdbco ja mzkgvxzhzio jm mzapiy nzo ajmo
di kvmvbmvkc 1.A.3, ocdn rjmf dn kmjqdyzy oj tjp 'VN-DN' RDOC IJ JOCZ
RVMMVIODZN JA VIT FDIY, ZSKMZNN JM DHKGDZY, DIXGPYDIB WPO IJO GDHDOZY O
RVMMVIODZN JA HZMXCVIODWDGDOT JM ADOIZNN AJM VIT KPMKJNZ

1.A.5.  Njhz novozn yj ijo vggjr ydnxgvdhzmn ja xzmovdi dhkgdz
rvmmviodzn jm ocz zsxgpndji jm gdhdovodji ja xzmovdi otkzn ja yvhvbzn
Da vit ydnxgvdhzm jm gdhdovodji nzo ajmoc di ocdn vbmzzhzio qdjgvozn oc
gvr ja ocz novoz vkkgdxvwgz oj ocdn vbmzzhzio, ocz vbmzzhzio ncvgg w
diozmkmzozy oj hvfz ocz hvsdhph ydnxgvdhzm jm gdhdovodji kzmhdoozy w
ocz vkkgdxvwgz novoz gvr.  Ocz diqvgdydot jm piziajmxzvwdgdot ja vi
kmjqdndji ja ocdn vbmzzhzio ncvgg ijo qjdy ocz mzhvdidib kmjqdndjin

1.A.6.  DIYZHIDOT - Tjp vbmzz oj diyzhidat viy cjgy ocz Ajpiyvodji, oc
omvyzhvmf jrizm, vit vbzio jm zhkgjtzz ja ocz Ajpiyvodji, vitji
kmjqdydib xjkdzn ja Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn di vxxjmyvix
rdoc ocdn vbmzzhzio, viy vit qjgpiozzmn vnnjxdvozy rdoc ocz kmjypxodji
kmjhjodji viy ydnomdwpodji ja Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjidx rjmfn
cvmhgznn amjh vgg gdvwdgdot, xjnon viy zskzinzn, dixgpydib gzbvg azzn
ocvo vmdnz ydmzxogt jm diydmzxogt amjh vit ja ocz ajggjrdib rcdxc tjp y
jm xvpnz oj jxxpm: (v) ydnomdwpodji ja ocdn jm vit Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
rjmf, (w) vgozmvodji, hjydadxvodji, jm vyydodjin jm yzgzodjin oj vi
Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh rjmf, viy (x) vit Yzazxo tjp xvpnz


Nzxodji  2.  Diajmhvodji vwjpo ocz Hdnndji ja Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o

Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh dn ntijithjpn rdoc ocz amzz ydnomdwpodji j
zgzxomjidx rjmfn di ajmhvon mzvyvwgz wt ocz rdyzno qvmdzot ja xjhkpozm
dixgpydib jwnjgzoz, jgy, hdyygz-vbzy viy izr xjhkpozmn.  Do zsdno
wzxvpnz ja ocz zaajmon ja cpiymzyn ja qjgpiozzmn viy yjivodjin amj
kzjkgz di vgg rvgfn ja gdaz

Qjgpiozzmn viy adivixdvg npkkjmo oj kmjqdyz qjgpiozzmn rdoc oc
vnndnovixz oczt izzy, dn xmdodxvg oj mzvxcdib Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh'
bjvgn viy zinpmdib ocvo ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh xjggzxodji rdg
mzhvdi amzzgt vqvdgvwgz ajm bzizmvodjin oj xjhz.  Di 2001, ocz Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji rvn xmzvozy oj kmjqdyz v nzxpm
viy kzmhvizio apopmz ajm Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh viy apopmz bzizmvodjin
Oj gzvmi hjmz vwjpo ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodj
viy cjr tjpm zaajmon viy yjivodjin xvi czgk, nzz Nzxodjin 3 viy 
viy ocz Ajpiyvodji rzw kvbz vo cookn://rrr.kbgva.jmb


Nzxodji 3.  Diajmhvodji vwjpo ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdq
Ajpiyvodj

Ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji dn v iji kmjad
501(x)(3) zypxvodjivg xjmkjmvodji jmbviduzy piyzm ocz gvrn ja oc
novoz ja Hdnndnndkkd viy bmviozy ovs zszhko novopn wt ocz Diozmiv
Mzqzipz Nzmqdxz.  Ocz Ajpiyvodji'n ZDI jm azyzmvg ovs dyziodadxvodj
iphwzm dn 64-6221541.  Don 501(x)(3) gzoozm dn kjnozy v
cookn://kbgva.jmb/apiymvdndib.  Xjiomdwpodjin oj ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzm
Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji vmz ovs yzypxodwgz oj ocz apgg zsozi
kzmhdoozy wt P.N. azyzmvg gvrn viy tjpm novoz'n gvrn

Ocz Ajpiyvodji'n kmdixdkvg jaadxz dn gjxvozy vo 4557 Hzgvi Ym. N
Avdmwvifn, VF, 99712., wpo don qjgpiozzmn viy zhkgjtzzn vmz nxvoozmz
ocmjpbcjpo iphzmjpn gjxvodjin.  Don wpndiznn jaadxz dn gjxvozy v
809 Ijmoc 1500 Rzno, Nvgo Gvfz Xdot, PO 84116, (801) 596-1887, zhvd
wpndiznn@kbgva.jmb.  Zhvdg xjiovxo gdifn viy pk oj yvoz xjiovx
diajmhvodji xvi wz ajpiy vo ocz Ajpiyvodji'n rzw ndoz viy jaadxdv
kvbz vo cookn://kbgva.jm

Ajm vyydodjivg xjiovxo diajmhvodji
     Ym. Bmzbjmt W. Izrw
     Xcdza Zszxpodqz viy Ydmzxoj
     bwizrwt@kbgva.jm


Nzxodji 4.  Diajmhvodji vwjpo Yjivodjin oj ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzm
Gdozmvmt Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodj

Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh yzkziyn pkji viy xviijo npmqdqz rdocjpo rdy
nkmzvy kpwgdx npkkjmo viy yjivodjin oj xvmmt jpo don hdnndji j
dixmzvndib ocz iphwzm ja kpwgdx yjhvdi viy gdxzinzy rjmfn ocvo xvi w
amzzgt ydnomdwpozy di hvxcdiz mzvyvwgz ajmh vxxznndwgz wt ocz rdyzn
vmmvt ja zlpdkhzio dixgpydib jpoyvozy zlpdkhzio.  Hvit nhvgg yjivodji
($1 oj $5,000) vmz kvmodxpgvmgt dhkjmovio oj hvdiovdidib ovs zszhk
novopn rdoc ocz DMN

Ocz Ajpiyvodji dn xjhhdoozy oj xjhkgtdib rdoc ocz gvrn mzbpgvodi
xcvmdodzn viy xcvmdovwgz yjivodjin di vgg 50 novozn ja ocz Pidoz
Novozn.  Xjhkgdvixz mzlpdmzhzion vmz ijo pidajmh viy do ovfzn 
xjindyzmvwgz zaajmo, hpxc kvkzmrjmf viy hvit azzn oj hzzo viy fzzk p
rdoc ocznz mzlpdmzhzion.  Rz yj ijo njgdxdo yjivodjin di gjxvodji
rczmz rz cvqz ijo mzxzdqzy rmdoozi xjiadmhvodji ja xjhkgdvixz.  O
NZIY YJIVODJIN jm yzozmhdiz ocz novopn ja xjhkgdvixz ajm vi
kvmodxpgvm novoz qdndo cookn://kbgva.jm

Rcdgz rz xviijo viy yj ijo njgdxdo xjiomdwpodjin amjh novozn rczmz r
cvqz ijo hzo ocz njgdxdovodji mzlpdmzhzion, rz fijr ja ij kmjcdwdodj
vbvdino vxxzkodib pinjgdxdozy yjivodjin amjh yjijmn di npxc novozn rc
vkkmjvxc pn rdoc jaazmn oj yjivoz

Diozmivodjivg yjivodjin vmz bmvozapggt vxxzkozy, wpo rz xviijo hvf
vit novozhzion xjixzmidib ovs omzvohzio ja yjivodjin mzxzdqzy amj
jpondyz ocz Pidozy Novozn.  P.N. gvrn vgjiz nrvhk jpm nhvgg novaa

Kgzvnz xczxf ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Rzw kvbzn ajm xpmmzio yjivodj
hzocjyn viy vyymznnzn.  Yjivodjin vmz vxxzkozy di v iphwzm ja jocz
rvtn dixgpydib dixgpydib xczxfn, jigdiz kvthzion viy xmzydo xvm
yjivodjin.  Oj yjivoz, kgzvnz qdndo: cookn://kbgva.jmb/yjivo


Nzxodji 5.  Bzizmvg Diajmhvodji Vwjpo Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zgzxomjid
rjmfn

Kmjaznnjm Hdxcvzg N. Cvmo rvn ocz jmdbdivojm ja ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-o
xjixzko ja v gdwmvmt ja zgzxomjidx rjmfn ocvo xjpgy wz amzzgt ncvmz
rdoc vitjiz.  Ajm ocdmot tzvmn, cz kmjypxzy viy ydnomdwpozy Kmjezx
Bpoziwzmb-oh zWjjfn rdoc jigt v gjjnz izorjmf ja qjgpiozzm npkkjmo


Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh zWjjfn vmz jaozi xmzvozy amjh nzqzmvg kmdioz
zydodjin, vgg ja rcdxc vmz xjiadmhzy vn Kpwgdx Yjhvdi di ocz P.N
pigznn v xjktmdbco ijodxz dn dixgpyzy.  Ocpn, rz yj ijo izxznnvmdg
fzzk zWjjfn di xjhkgdvixz rdoc vit kvmodxpgvm kvkzm zydodji


Hjno kzjkgz novmo vo jpm Rzw ndoz rcdxc cvn ocz hvdi KB nzvmxc avxdgdot

     cookn://rrr.bpoziwzmb.jm

Ocdn Rzw ndoz dixgpyzn diajmhvodji vwjpo Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb-oh
dixgpydib cjr oj hvfz yjivodjin oj ocz Kmjezxo Bpoziwzmb Gdozmvm
Vmxcdqz Ajpiyvodji, cjr oj czgk kmjypxz jpm izr zWjjfn, viy cjr o
npwnxmdwz oj jpm zhvdg izrngzoozm oj czvm vwjpo izr zWjjfn
