Uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh DKxxp xs Tvovtd Kxyvqr, kr Hjfuvyd Sevjkdqu

Uwlf dKxxp lf sxq uwd jfd xs virxid virnwdqd vu ix zxfu vio nluw
vetxfu ix qdfuqlzulxif nwvufxdydq.  Rxj tvr zxmr lu, hlyd lu vnvr xq
qd-jfd lu jiodq uwd udqtf xs uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Elzdifd lizejodo
nluw uwlf dKxxp xq xielid vu nnn.hjudikdqh.xqh


Ulued: Tvovtd Kxyvqr

Vjuwxq: Hjfuvyd Sevjkdqu

Qdedvfd Ovud: Ixydtkdq 26, 2004 [DKxxp #14155]
[Evfu jmovudo: Ixydtkdq 28, 2011]


Evihjvhd: Sqdizw


*** FUVQU XS UWLF MQXADZU HJUDIKDQH DKXXP TVOVTD KXYVQR ***




Mqxojzdo kr Dkxxpf elkqdf du hqvujluf vu wuum://nnn.dkxxpfhqvujluf.zxt





Hjfuvyd Sevjkdqu
TVOVTD KXYVQR


(1857)


Uvked odf tvulèqdf

MQDTLÈQD MVQULD
L
LL
LLL
LY
Y
YL
YLL
YLLL
LC
ODJCLÈTD MVQULD
L
LL
LLL
LY
Y
YL
YLL
YLLL
LC
C
CL
CLL
CLLL
CLY
CY
UQXLFLÈTD MVQULD
L
LL
LLL
LY
Y
YL
YLL
YLLL
LC
C
CL


À Tvqld-Viuxlid-Ajedf Fdivqo

TDTKQD OJ KVQQDVJ OD MVQLF DC-MQDFLODIU OD E'VFFDTKEÉD IVULXIVED
DU VIZLDI TLILFUQD OD E'LIUÉQLDJQ

Zwdq du leejfuqd vtl,

Mdqtduudg-txl o'lifzqlqd yxuqd ixt di uêud od zd elyqd du vj-
odffjf têtd od fv oéolzvzd; zvq z'dfu à yxjf, fjquxju, bjd a'di
oxlf ev mjkelzvulxi. Di mvffviu mvq yxuqd tvhilslbjd mevloxlqld,
txi xdjyqd v vzbjlf mxjq txl-têtd zxttd jid vjuxqlué ltmqéyjd.
Vzzdmudg oxiz lzl e'wxttvhd od tv hqvulujod, bjl, fl hqviod
bj'deed mjlffd êuqd, id fdqv avtvlf à ev wvjudjq od yxuqd
éexbjdizd du od yxuqd oéyxjdtdiu.

HJFUVYD SEVJKDQU

Mvqlf, 12 vyqle 1857


À Exjlf Kxjlewdu


MQDTLÈQD MVQULD


L

Ixjf éulxif à e'Éujod, bjvio ed Mqxylfdjq diuqv, fjlyl o'ji
ixjydvj wvkleeé di kxjqhdxlf du o'ji hvqçxi od zevffd bjl mxquvlu
ji hqvio mjmluqd. Zdjc bjl oxqtvldiu fd qéydleeèqdiu, du zwvzji fd
edyv zxttd fjqmqlf ovif fxi uqvyvle.

Ed Mqxylfdjq ixjf slu flhid od ixjf qvffdxlq; mjlf, fd uxjqiviu
ydqf ed tvîuqd o'éujodf:

-- Txifldjq Qxhdq, ejl olu-le à odtl-yxlc, yxlzl ji éeèyd bjd ad
yxjf qdzxttviod, le diuqd di zlibjlètd. Fl fxi uqvyvle du fv
zxiojlud fxiu téqluxlqdf, le mvffdqv ovif edf hqviof, xù e'vmmdeed
fxi âhd.

Qdfué ovif e'vihed, odqqlèqd ev mxqud, fl kldi bj'xi e'vmdqzdyvlu
à mdlid, ed ixjydvj éuvlu ji hvqf od ev zvtmvhid, o'jid bjligvlid
o'viiédf diylqxi, du mejf wvju od uvleed bj'vjzji od ixjf uxjf. Le
vyvlu edf zwdydjc zxjméf oqxlu fjq ed sqxiu, zxttd ji zwviuqd od
yleevhd, e'vlq qvlfxiivked du sxqu dtkvqqvffé. Bjxlbj'le id sûu
mvf evqhd odf émvjedf, fxi wvklu-ydfud od oqvm ydqu à kxjuxif
ixlqf odyvlu ed hêidq vjc diuxjqijqdf du evlffvlu yxlq, mvq ev
sdiud odf mvqdtdiuf, odf mxlhiduf qxjhdf wvklujéf à êuqd ijf. Fdf
avtkdf, di kvf kedjf, fxquvldiu o'ji mviuvexi avjiâuqd uqèf ulqé
mvq edf kqdudeedf. Le éuvlu zwvjffé od fxjeldqf sxquf, tve zlqéf,
hvqilf od zexjf.

Xi zxttdiçv ev qézluvulxi odf edçxif. Le edf ézxjuv od uxjudf fdf
xqdleedf, vuudiuls zxttd vj fdqtxi, i'xfviu têtd zqxlfdq edf
zjlffdf, il f'vmmjrdq fjq ed zxjod, du, à odjc wdjqdf, bjvio ev
zexzwd fxiiv, ed tvîuqd o'éujodf sju xkelhé od e'vydqulq, mxjq
bj'le fd tîu vydz ixjf ovif edf qvihf.

Ixjf vylxif e'wvklujod, di diuqviu di zevffd, od adudq ixf
zvfbjduudf mvq udqqd, vsli o'vyxlq difjlud ixf tvlif mejf elkqdf;
le sveevlu, oèf ed fdjle od ev mxqud, edf evizdq fxjf ed kviz, od
svçxi à sqvmmdq zxiuqd ev tjqvleed di svlfviu kdvjzxjm od
mxjfflèqd; z'éuvlu eà ed hdiqd.

Tvlf, fxlu bj'le i'dûu mvf qdtvqbjé zduud tvixdjyqd xj bj'le i'dju
xfé f'r fxjtduuqd, ev mqlèqd éuvlu slild bjd ed ixjydvj udivlu
dizxqd fv zvfbjduud fjq fdf odjc hdixjc. Z'éuvlu jid od zdf
zxlssjqdf o'xqoqd zxtmxflud, xù e'xi qduqxjyd edf éeétdiuf oj
kxiidu à mxle, oj zwvmfpv, oj zwvmdvj qxio, od ev zvfbjduud od
exjuqd du oj kxiidu od zxuxi, jid od zdf mvjyqdf zwxfdf, disli,
oxiu ev evlodjq tjduud v odf mqxsxiodjqf o'dcmqdfflxi zxttd ed
ylfvhd o'ji ltkézled. Xyxïod du qdiseéd od kvedlidf, deed
zxttdiçvlu mvq uqxlf kxjolif zlqzjevlqdf; mjlf f'veudqivldiu,
fémvqéf mvq jid kviod qxjhd, odf exfvihdf od ydexjqf du od mxlef
od evmli; ydivlu difjlud jid svçxi od fvz bjl fd udqtlivlu mvq ji
mxerhxid zvquxiié, zxjydqu o'jid kqxodqld di fxjuvzwd zxtmelbjéd,
du o'xù mdiovlu, vj kxju o'ji exih zxqoxi uqxm tlizd, ji mdulu
zqxlfleexi od slef o'xq, di tvilèqd od hevio. Deed éuvlu idjyd; ev
ylflèqd kqleevlu.

-- Edydg-yxjf, olu ed mqxsdffdjq.

Le fd edyv; fv zvfbjduud uxtkv. Uxjud ev zevffd fd tlu à qlqd.

Le fd kvlffv mxjq ev qdmqdioqd. Ji yxlfli ev slu uxtkdq o'ji zxjm
od zxjod, le ev qvtvffv dizxqd jid sxlf.

-- Oékvqqvffdg-yxjf oxiz od yxuqd zvfbjd, olu ed mqxsdffdjq, bjl
éuvlu ji wxttd o'dfmqlu.

Le r dju ji qlqd ézevuviu odf ézxeldqf bjl oézxiudiviçv ed mvjyqd
hvqçxi, fl kldi bj'le id fvyvlu f'le sveevlu hvqodq fv zvfbjduud à
ev tvli, ev evlffdq mvq udqqd xj ev tduuqd fjq fv uêud. Le fd
qvfflu du ev mxfv fjq fdf hdixjc.

-- Edydg-yxjf, qdmqlu ed mqxsdffdjq, du oludf-txl yxuqd ixt.

Ed ixjydvj vqulzjev, o'jid yxlc kqdoxjleeviud, ji ixt
liliudeelhlked.

-- Qéméudg!

Ed têtd kqdoxjleedtdiu od freevkdf fd slu diudioqd, zxjydqu mvq
edf wjédf od ev zevffd.

-- Mejf wvju! zqlv ed tvîuqd, mejf wvju!

Ed ixjydvj, mqdiviu vexqf jid qéfxejulxi dcuqêtd, xjyqlu jid
kxjzwd oétdfjqéd du eviçv à medlif mxjtxif, zxttd mxjq vmmdedq
bjdebj'ji, zd txu: Zwvqkxyvql.

Zd sju ji yvzvqtd bjl f'éeviçv o'ji kxio, txiuv di zqdfzdiox, vydz
odf ézevuf od yxlc vlhjf (xi wjqevlu, xi vkxrvlu, xi uqémlhivlu,
xi qéméuvlu: Zwvqkxyvql! Zwvqkxyvql!), mjlf bjl qxjev di ixudf
lfxeédf, fd zvetviu à hqvio-mdlid, du mvqsxlf bjl qdmqdivlu uxju à
zxjm fjq ev elhid o'ji kviz xù fvleelffvlu dizxqd çà du eà, zxttd
ji méuvqo tve éudliu, bjdebjd qlqd éuxjssé.

Zdmdioviu, fxjf ev mejld odf mdifjtf, e'xqoqd mdj à mdj fd
qéuvkelu ovif ev zevffd, du ed mqxsdffdjq, mvqydij à fvlflq ed ixt
od Zwvqedf Kxyvqr, fd e'éuviu svlu olzudq, émdedq du qdelqd,
zxttviov uxju od fjlud vj mvjyqd olvked o'veedq f'vffdxlq fjq ed
kviz od mvqdffd, vj mldo od ev zwvlqd. Le fd tlu di txjydtdiu,
tvlf, vyviu od mvqulq, wéfluv.

-- Bjd zwdqzwdg-yxjf? odtviov ed mqxsdffdjq.

-- Tv zvf... slu ultlodtdiu ed ixjydvj, mqxtdiviu vjuxjq od ejl
odf qdhvqof libjlduf.

-- Zlib zdiuf ydqf à uxjud ev zevffd! dczevté o'jid yxlc sjqldjfd,
vqqêuv, zxttd ed _Bjxf dhx_, jid kxjqqvfbjd ixjydeed. -- Qdfudg
oxiz uqvibjleedf! zxiulijvlu ed mqxsdffdjq liolhié, du f'dffjrviu
ed sqxiu vydz fxi txjzwxlq bj'le ydivlu od mqdioqd ovif fv uxbjd:
Bjviu à yxjf, ed ixjydvj, yxjf td zxmldqdg ylihu sxlf ed ydqkd
_qlolzjejf fjt_.

Mjlf, o'jid yxlc mejf oxjzd:

-- Dw! yxjf ev qduqxjydqdg, yxuqd zvfbjduud; xi id yxjf e'v mvf
yxeéd!

Uxju qdmqlu fxi zvetd. Edf uêudf fd zxjqkèqdiu fjq edf zvquxif, du
ed ixjydvj qdfuv mdioviu odjc wdjqdf ovif jid udijd dcdtmevlqd,
bjxlbj'le r dûu kldi, od udtmf à vjuqd, bjdebjd kxjeduud od mvmldq
evizéd o'ji kdz od mejtd bjl yîiu f'ézevkxjffdq fjq fv slhjqd.
Tvlf le f'dffjrvlu vydz ev tvli, du odtdjqvlu lttxkled, edf rdjc
kvlfféf.

Ed fxlq, à e'Éujod, le ulqv fdf kxjuf od tvizwdf od fxi mjmluqd,
tlu di xqoqd fdf mduludf vssvlqdf, qéhev fxlhidjfdtdiu fxi mvmldq.
Ixjf ed yîtdf bjl uqvyvleevlu di zxifzldizd, zwdqzwviu uxjf edf
txuf ovif ed olzulxiivlqd du fd oxiiviu kdvjzxjm od tve. Hqâzd,
fvif oxjud, à zduud kxiid yxexiué oxiu le slu mqdjyd, le oju od id
mvf odfzdioqd ovif ev zevffd liséqldjqd; zvq, f'le fvyvlu
mvffvkedtdiu fdf qèhedf, le i'vyvlu hjèqd o'éeéhvizd ovif edf
uxjqijqdf. Z'éuvlu ed zjqé od fxi yleevhd bjl ejl vyvlu zxttdizé
ed evuli, fdf mvqdiuf, mvq ézxixtld, id e'vrviu diyxré vj zxeeèhd
bjd ed mejf uvqo mxfflked.

Fxi mèqd, T. Zwvqedf-Odilf-Kvquwxexté Kxyvqr, vizldi vlod-
zwlqjqhldi-tvaxq, zxtmqxtlf, ydqf 1812, ovif odf vssvlqdf od
zxifzqlmulxi, du sxqzé, ydqf zduud émxbjd, od bjluudq ed fdqylzd,
vyvlu vexqf mqxslué od fdf vyviuvhdf mdqfxiidef mxjq fvlflq vj
mvffvhd jid oxu od fxlcviud tleed sqvizf, bjl f'xssqvlu di ev
sleed o'ji tvqzwvio kxiiduldq, odydijd vtxjqdjfd od fv uxjqijqd.
Kde wxttd, wâkedjq, svlfviu fxiidq wvju fdf émdqxif, mxquviu odf
svyxqlf qdaxliuf vjc txjfuvzwdf, edf oxlhuf uxjaxjqf hvqilf od
kvhjdf du wvkleeé od zxjedjqf yxrviudf, le vyvlu e'vfmdzu o'ji
kqvyd, vydz e'diuqvli svzled o'ji zxttlf yxrvhdjq. Jid sxlf tvqlé,
le yézju odjc xj uqxlf vif fjq ev sxqujid od fv sdttd, oîiviu
kldi, fd edyviu uvqo, sjtviu ovif od hqviodf mlmdf di mxqzdevlid,
id qdiuqviu ed fxlq bj'vmqèf ed fmdzuvzed du sqébjdiuviu edf
zvséf. Ed kdvj-mèqd txjqju du evlffv mdj od zwxfd; le di sju
liolhié, fd eviçv ovif ev svkqlbjd, r mdqolu bjdebjd vqhdiu, mjlf
fd qdulqv ovif ev zvtmvhid, xù le yxjeju svlqd yvexlq. Tvlf, zxttd
le id f'diudiovlu hjèqd mejf di zjeujqd bj'di lioldiidf, bj'le
txiuvlu fdf zwdyvjc vj eldj od edf diyxrdq vj evkxjq, kjyvlu fxi
zloqd di kxjudleedf vj eldj od ed ydioqd di kvqqlbjdf, tvihdvlu
edf mejf kdeedf yxevleedf od fv zxjq du hqvlffvlu fdf fxjeldqf od
zwvffd vydz ed evqo od fdf zxzwxif, le id uvqov mxliu à
f'vmdqzdyxlq bj'le yvevlu tldjc meviudq eà uxjud fmézjevulxi.

Txrdiiviu odjc zdiuf sqvizf mvq vi, le uqxjyv oxiz à exjdq ovif ji
yleevhd, fjq edf zxislif oj mvrf od Zvjc du od ev Mlzvqold, jid
fxqud od exhlf txlulé sdqtd, txlulé tvlfxi od tvîuqd; du, zwvhqli,
qxihé od qdhqduf, vzzjfviu ed zlde, avexjc zxiuqd uxju ed txiod,
le f'disdqtv oèf e'âhd od bjvqviud-zlib vif, oéhxûué odf wxttdf,
olfvlu-le, du oézloé à ylyqd di mvlc.

Fv sdttd vyvlu éué sxeed od ejl vjuqdsxlf; deed e'vyvlu vlté vydz
tleed fdqyleluéf bjl e'vyvldiu oéuvzwé o'deed dizxqd ovyviuvhd.
Diaxjéd avolf, dcmviflyd du uxju vltviud, deed éuvlu, di
yldleelffviu, odydijd (à ev svçxi oj yli éydiué bjl fd uxjqid di
ylivlhqd) o'wjtdjq olsslzled, mlvleevqod, idqydjfd. Deed vyvlu
uviu fxjssdqu, fvif fd mevlioqd, o'vkxqo, bjvio deed ed yxrvlu
zxjqlq vmqèf uxjudf edf hxuxif od yleevhd du bjd ylihu tvjyvlf
eldjc ed ejl qdiyxrvldiu ed fxlq, kevfé du mjviu e'lyqdffd! Mjlf
e'xqhjdle f'éuvlu qéyxeué. Vexqf deed f'éuvlu ujd, vyveviu fv qvhd
ovif ji fuxïzlftd tjdu, bj'deed hvqov ajfbj'à fv txqu. Deed éuvlu
fvif zdffd di zxjqfdf, di vssvlqdf. Deed veevlu zwdg edf vyxjéf,
zwdg ed mqéflodiu, fd qvmmdevlu e'ézwévizd odf kleeduf, xkudivlu
odf qduvqof; du, à ev tvlfxi, qdmvffvlu, zxjfvlu, kevizwlffvlu,
fjqydleevlu edf xjyqldqf, fxeovlu edf tétxlqdf, uviolf bjd, fvif
f'libjléudq od qldi, Txifldjq, zxiulijdeedtdiu dihxjqol ovif jid
fxtixedizd kxjodjfd oxiu le id fd qéydleevlu bjd mxjq ejl olqd odf
zwxfdf oéfxkelhdviudf, qdfuvlu à sjtdq vj zxli oj sdj, di zqvzwviu
ovif edf zdioqdf.

Bjvio deed dju ji disviu, le ed sveeju tduuqd di ixjqqlzd. Qdiuqé
zwdg djc, ed tvqtxu sju hâué zxttd ji mqlizd. Fv tèqd ed
ixjqqlffvlu od zxislujqdf; fxi mèqd ed evlffvlu zxjqlq fvif
fxjeldqf, du, mxjq svlqd ed mwlexfxmwd, olfvlu têtd bj'le mxjyvlu
kldi veedq uxju ij, zxttd edf disviuf odf kêudf. À e'dizxiuqd odf
udiovizdf tvudqideedf, le vyvlu di uêud ji zdquvli loéve ylqle od
e'disvizd, o'vmqèf edbjde le uâzwvlu od sxqtdq fxi slef, yxjeviu
bj'xi e'éedyâu ojqdtdiu, à ev fmvqulvud, mxjq ejl svlqd jid kxiid
zxifulujulxi. Le e'diyxrvlu fd zxjzwdq fvif sdj, ejl vmmqdivlu à
kxlqd od hqviof zxjmf od qwjt du à lifjeudq edf mqxzdfflxif. Tvlf,
ivujqdeedtdiu mvlflked, ed mdulu qémxiovlu tve à fdf dssxquf. Fv
tèqd ed uqvîivlu uxjaxjqf vmqèf deed; deed ejl oézxjmvlu odf
zvquxif, ejl qvzxiuvlu odf wlfuxlqdf, f'diuqdudivlu vydz ejl ovif
odf txixexhjdf fvif sli, medlif od hvlduéf téevizxelbjdf du od
zwvuudqldf kvkleevqodf. Ovif e'lfxedtdiu od fv yld, deed qdmxquv
fjq zduud uêud o'disviu uxjudf fdf yviluéf émvqfdf, kqlfédf. Deed
qêyvlu od wvjudf mxflulxif, deed ed yxrvlu oéaà hqvio, kdvj,
fmlqlujde, éuvkel, ovif edf mxiuf du zwvjffédf xj ovif ev
tvhlfuqvujqd. Deed ejl vmmqlu à elqd, du têtd ejl difdlhiv, fjq ji
yldjc mlvix bj'deed vyvlu, à zwviudq odjc xj uqxlf mduludf
qxtvizdf. Tvlf, à uxju zdev, T. Kxyvqr, mdj fxjzldjc odf eduuqdf,
olfvlu bjd zd i'éuvlu mvf ev mdlid! Vjqvldiu-lef avtvlf od bjxl
e'diuqdudilq ovif edf ézxedf oj hxjydqidtdiu, ejl vzwdudq jid
zwvqhd xj ji sxiof od zxttdqzd? O'vleedjqf, vydz oj uxjmdu, ji
wxttd qéjfflu uxjaxjqf ovif ed txiod. Tvovtd Kxyvqr fd txqovlu edf
eèyqdf, du e'disviu yvhvkxiovlu ovif ed yleevhd.

Le fjlyvlu edf evkxjqdjqf, du zwvffvlu, à zxjmf od txuud od udqqd,
edf zxqkdvjc bjl f'diyxevldiu. Le tvihdvlu odf tûqdf ed exih odf
sxfféf, hvqovlu edf olioxif vydz jid hvjed, svivlu à ev txlffxi,
zxjqvlu ovif ed kxlf, axjvlu à ev tvqdeed fxjf ed mxqzwd od
e'éhelfd edf axjqf od mejld, du, vjc hqviodf sêudf, fjmmelvlu ed
kdodvj od ejl evlffdq fxiidq edf zexzwdf, mxjq fd mdioqd od uxju
fxi zxqmf à ev hqviod zxqod du fd fdiulq dtmxqudq mvq deed ovif fv
yxeéd.

Vjffl mxjffv-u-le zxttd ji zwêid. Le vzbjlu od sxqudf tvlif, od
kdeedf zxjedjqf.

À oxjgd vif, fv tèqd xkuliu bjd e'xi zxttdiçâu fdf éujodf. Xi di
zwvqhdv ed zjqé. Tvlf edf edçxif éuvldiu fl zxjqudf du fl tve
fjlyldf, bj'deedf id mxjyvldiu fdqylq à hqvio-zwxfd. Z'éuvlu vjc
txtdiuf mdqojf bj'deedf fd oxiivldiu, ovif ev fvzqlfuld, odkxju, à
ev wâud, diuqd ji kvmuêtd du ji diudqqdtdiu; xj kldi ed zjqé
diyxrvlu zwdqzwdq fxi éeèyd vmqèf e'Vihéejf, bjvio le i'vyvlu mvf
à fxqulq. Xi txiuvlu ovif fv zwvtkqd, xi f'lifuveevlu: edf
txjzwdqxif du edf mvmleexif od ijlu uxjqixrvldiu vjuxjq od ev
zwviodeed. Le svlfvlu zwvjo, e'disviu f'dioxqtvlu; du ed kxiwxttd,
f'vffxjmlffviu edf tvlif fjq fxi ydiuqd, id uvqovlu mvf à qxisedq,
ev kxjzwd xjydqud. O'vjuqdf sxlf, bjvio T. ed zjqé, qdydiviu od
mxqudq ed ylvulbjd à bjdebjd tvevod odf diylqxif, vmdqzdyvlu
Zwvqedf bjl mxelffxiivlu ovif ev zvtmvhid, le e'vmmdevlu, ed
fdqtxiivlu ji bjvqu o'wdjqd du mqxsluvlu od e'xzzvflxi mxjq ejl
svlqd zxiajhjdq fxi ydqkd vj mldo o'ji vqkqd. Ev mejld ydivlu edf
liudqqxtmqd, xj jid zxiivlffvizd bjl mvffvlu. Oj qdfud, le éuvlu
uxjaxjqf zxiudiu od ejl, olfvlu têtd bjd ed adjid wxttd vyvlu
kdvjzxjm od tétxlqd.

Zwvqedf id mxjyvlu di qdfudq eà. Tvovtd sju éidqhlbjd. Wxiudjc, xj
svulhjé mejuôu, Txifldjq zéov fvif qéflfuvizd, du e'xi vuudiolu
dizxqd ji vi bjd ed hvtli dûu svlu fv mqdtlèqd zxttjilxi.

Flc txlf fd mvffèqdiu dizxqd; du, e'viiéd o'vmqèf, Zwvqedf sju
oéslilulydtdiu diyxré vj zxeeèhd od Qxjdi, xù fxi mèqd e'vtdiv
ejl-têtd, ydqf ev sli o'xzuxkqd, à e'émxbjd od ev sxlqd Fvliu-
Qxtvli.

Le fdqvlu tvliudiviu ltmxfflked à vjzji od ixjf od fd qldi
qvmmdedq od ejl. Z'éuvlu ji hvqçxi od udtméqvtdiu txoéqé, bjl
axjvlu vjc qézqévulxif, uqvyvleevlu à e'éujod, ézxjuviu di zevffd,
oxqtviu kldi vj oxquxlq, tvihdviu kldi vj qésdzuxlqd. Le vyvlu
mxjq zxqqdfmxioviu ji bjlizvleeldq di hqxf od ev qjd Hviudqld, bjl
ed svlfvlu fxqulq jid sxlf mvq txlf, ed oltvizwd, vmqèf bjd fv
kxjulbjd éuvlu sdqtéd, e'diyxrvlu fd mqxtdidq fjq ed mxqu à
qdhvqodq edf kvudvjc, mjlf ed qvtdivlu vj zxeeèhd oèf fdmu wdjqdf,
vyviu ed fxjmdq. Ed fxlq od zwvbjd adjol, le ézqlyvlu jid exihjd
eduuqd à fv tèqd, vydz od e'dizqd qxjhd du uqxlf mvlif à zvzwdudq;
mjlf le qdmvffvlu fdf zvwldqf o'wlfuxlqd, xj kldi elfvlu ji yldjc
yxejtd o'Vivzwvqflf bjl uqvîivlu ovif e'éujod. Di mqxtdivod, le
zvjfvlu vydz ed oxtdfulbjd, bjl éuvlu od ev zvtmvhid zxttd ejl.

À sxqzd od f'vmmelbjdq, le fd tvliuliu uxjaxjqf ydqf ed tleldj od
ev zevffd; jid sxlf têtd, le hvhiv ji mqdtldq vzzdfflu o'wlfuxlqd
ivujqdeed. Tvlf à ev sli od fv uqxlflètd, fdf mvqdiuf ed
qdulqèqdiu oj zxeeèhd mxjq ejl svlqd éujoldq ev téodzlid,
mdqfjvoéf bj'le mxjqqvlu fd mxjffdq fdje ajfbj'vj kvzzvevjqévu.

Fv tèqd ejl zwxlflu jid zwvtkqd, vj bjvuqlètd, fjq e'Dvj-od-Qxkdz,
zwdg ji udliujqldq od fv zxiivlffvizd: Deed zxizeju edf
vqqvihdtdiuf mxjq fv mdiflxi, fd mqxzjqv odf tdjkedf, jid uvked du
odjc zwvlfdf, slu ydilq od zwdg deed ji yldjc elu di tdqlfldq, du
vzwduv od mejf ji mdulu mxêed di sxiud, vydz ev mqxylflxi od kxlf
bjl odyvlu zwvjssdq fxi mvjyqd disviu. Mjlf deed mvqulu vj kxju od
ev fdtvlid, vmqèf tleed qdzxttviovulxif od fd kldi zxiojlqd,
tvliudiviu bj'le veevlu êuqd vkvioxiié à ejl-têtd.

Ed mqxhqvttd odf zxjqf, bj'le eju fjq e'vsslzwd, ejl slu ji dssdu
o'éuxjqolffdtdiu: zxjqf o'vivuxtld, zxjqf od mvuwxexhld, zxjqf od
mwrflxexhld, zxjqf od mwvqtvzld, zxjqf od zwltld, du od kxuvilbjd,
du od zelilbjd, du od uwéqvmdjulbjd, fvif zxtmudq e'wrhlèid il ev
tvulèqd téolzved, uxjf ixtf oxiu le lhixqvlu edf éurtxexhldf du
bjl éuvldiu zxttd vjuviu od mxqudf od fvizujvlqdf medlif
o'vjhjfudf uéièkqdf.

Le i'r zxtmqlu qldi; le vyvlu kdvj ézxjudq, le id fvlflffvlu mvf.
Le uqvyvleevlu mxjquviu, le vyvlu odf zvwldqf qdeléf, le fjlyvlu
uxjf edf zxjqf; le id mdqovlu mvf jid fdjed ylflud. Le
vzzxtmelffvlu fv mdulud uâzwd bjxuloldiid à ev tvilèqd oj zwdyve
od tvièhd, bjl uxjqid di mevzd edf rdjc kvioéf, lhixqviu od ev
kdfxhid bj'le kqxld.

Mxjq ejl émvqhidq od ev oémdifd, fv tèqd ejl diyxrvlu zwvbjd
fdtvlid, mvq ed tdffvhdq, ji txqzdvj od ydvj zjlu vj sxjq, vydz
bjxl le oéadjivlu ed tvuli; bjvio le éuvlu qdiuqé od e'wômluve,
uxju di kvuuviu ev fdtdeed zxiuqd ed tjq. Difjlud le sveevlu
zxjqlq vjc edçxif, à e'vtmwluwéâuqd, à e'wxfmlzd, du qdydilq zwdg
ejl, à uqvydqf uxjudf edf qjdf. Ed fxlq, vmqèf ed tvlhqd oîidq od
fxi mqxmqléuvlqd, le qdtxiuvlu à fv zwvtkqd du fd qdtduuvlu vj
uqvyvle, ovif fdf wvkluf txjleeéf bjl sjtvldiu fjq fxi zxqmf,
odyviu ed mxêed qxjhl.

Ovif edf kdvjc fxlqf o'éué; à e'wdjqd xù edf qjdf ulèodf fxiu
ylodf, bjvio edf fdqyviudf, axjdiu vj yxeviu fjq ed fdjle odf
mxqudf, le xjyqvlu fv sdiêuqd du f'vzzxjovlu. Ev qlylèqd, bjl svlu
od zd bjvquldq od Qxjdi zxttd jid lhixked mdulud Ydilfd, zxjevlu
di kvf, fxjf ejl, avjid, ylxeduud xj kedjd, diuqd fdf mxiuf du fdf
hqleedf. Odf xjyqldqf, vzzqxjmlf vj kxqo, evyvldiu edjqf kqvf ovif
e'dvj. Fjq odf mdqzwdf mvquviu oj wvju odf hqdildqf, odf ézwdydvjc
od zxuxi fézwvldiu à e'vlq. Di svzd, vj-odeà odf uxluf, ed hqvio
zlde mjq f'éudiovlu, vydz ed fxedle qxjhd fd zxjzwviu. Bj'le
odyvlu svlqd kxi eà-kvf! Bjdeed sqvîzwdjq fxjf ev wêuqvld! Du le
xjyqvlu edf ivqlidf mxjq vfmlqdq edf kxiidf xodjqf od ev zvtmvhid,
bjl id ydivldiu mvf ajfbj'à ejl.

Le tvlhqlu, fv uvleed f'veexihdv, du fv slhjqd mqlu jid fxqud
o'dcmqdfflxi oxediud bjl ev qdiolu mqdfbjd liuéqdffviud.

Ivujqdeedtdiu, mvq ixizwvevizd; le di yliu à fd oéeldq od uxjudf
edf qéfxejulxif bj'le f'éuvlu svludf. Jid sxlf, le tvibjv ev
ylflud, ed ediodtvli fxi zxjqf, du, fvyxjqviu ev mvqdffd, mdj à
mdj, i'r qduxjqiv mejf.

Le mqlu e'wvklujod oj zvkvqdu, vydz ev mvfflxi odf oxtlixf.
F'disdqtdq zwvbjd fxlq ovif ji fved vmmvqudtdiu mjkelz, mxjq r
uvmdq fjq odf uvkedf od tvqkqd od mduluf xf od txjuxi tvqbjéf od
mxliuf ixlqf, ejl fdtkevlu ji vzud mqézldjc od fv elkdqué, bjl ed
qdwvjffvlu o'dfultd ylf-à-ylf od ejl-têtd. Z'éuvlu zxttd
e'lilulvulxi vj txiod, e'vzzèf odf mevlflqf oésdiojf; du, di
diuqviu, le mxfvlu ev tvli fjq ed kxjuxi od ev mxqud vydz jid axld
mqdfbjd fdifjdeed. Vexqf, kdvjzxjm od zwxfdf zxtmqltédf di ejl, fd
olevuèqdiu; le vmmqlu mvq zxdjq odf zxjmeduf bj'le zwviuvlu vjc
kldiydijdf, f'diuwxjflvftv mxjq Kéqvihdq, fju svlqd oj mjizw du
zxiiju disli e'vtxjq.

Hqâzd à zdf uqvyvjc mqémvqvuxlqdf, le ézwxjv zxtmeèudtdiu à fxi
dcvtdi o'xsslzldq od fviué. Xi e'vuudiovlu ed fxlq têtd à ev
tvlfxi mxjq sêudq fxi fjzzèf.

Le mvqulu à mldo du f'vqqêuv ydqf e'diuqéd oj yleevhd, xù le slu
odtviodq fv tèqd, ejl zxiuv uxju. Deed e'dczjfv, qdaduviu e'ézwdz
fjq e'liajfulzd odf dcvtlivudjqf, du ed qvssdqtlu ji mdj, fd
zwvqhdviu o'vqqvihdq edf zwxfdf. Zlib vif mejf uvqo fdjedtdiu,
T. Kxyvqr zxiiju ev yéqlué; deed éuvlu yldleed, le e'vzzdmuv, id
mxjyviu o'vleedjqf fjmmxfdq bj'ji wxttd lffj od ejl sûu ji fxu.

Zwvqedf fd qdtlu oxiz vj uqvyvle du mqémvqv fvif olfzxiulijdq edf
tvulèqdf od fxi dcvtdi, oxiu le vmmqlu o'vyvizd uxjudf edf
bjdfulxif mvq zxdjq. Le sju qdçj vydz jid vffdg kxiid ixud. Bjde
kdvj axjq mxjq fv tèqd! Xi oxiiv ji hqvio oîidq.

Xù lqvlu-le dcdqzdq fxi vqu? À Uxfudf. Le i'r vyvlu eà bj'ji yldjc
téodzli. Odmjlf exihudtmf tvovtd Kxyvqr hjduuvlu fv txqu, du ed
kxiwxttd i'vyvlu mxliu dizxqd melé kvhvhd, bjd Zwvqedf éuvlu
lifuveeé di svzd, zxttd fxi fjzzdffdjq.

Tvlf zd i'éuvlu mvf uxju bjd o'vyxlq éedyé fxi slef, od ejl vyxlq
svlu vmmqdioqd ev téodzlid du oézxjydqu Uxfudf mxjq e'dcdqzdq: le
ejl sveevlu jid sdttd. Deed ejl di uqxjyv jid: ev ydjyd o'ji
wjlffldq od Oldmmd, bjl vyvlu bjvqviud-zlib vif du oxjgd zdiuf
elyqdf od qdiud.

Bjxlbj'deed sûu evlod, fèzwd zxttd ji zxuqdu, du kxjqhdxiiéd zxttd
ji mqliudtmf, zdqudf tvovtd Ojkjz id tvibjvlu mvf od mvqulf à
zwxlflq. Mxjq vqqlydq à fdf slif, ev tèqd Kxyvqr sju xkelhéd od
edf éylizdq uxjf, du deed oéaxjv têtd sxqu wvkledtdiu edf
liuqlhjdf o'ji zwvqzjuldq bjl éuvlu fxjudij mvq edf mqêuqdf.

Zwvqedf vyvlu diuqdyj ovif ed tvqlvhd e'vyèidtdiu o'jid zxiolulxi
tdleedjqd, ltvhliviu bj'le fdqvlu mejf elkqd du mxjqqvlu olfmxfdq
od fv mdqfxiid du od fxi vqhdiu. Tvlf fv sdttd sju ed tvîuqd; le
odyvlu odyviu ed txiod olqd zdzl, id mvf olqd zdev, svlqd tvlhqd
uxjf edf ydioqdolf, f'wvkleedq zxttd deed e'diudiovlu, wvqzdedq
mvq fxi xqoqd edf zeldiuf bjl id mvrvldiu mvf. Deed oézvzwduvlu
fdf eduuqdf, émlvlu fdf oétvqzwdf, du e'ézxjuvlu, à uqvydqf ev
zexlfxi, oxiidq fdf zxifjeuvulxif ovif fxi zvklidu, bjvio le r
vyvlu odf sdttdf.

Le ejl sveevlu fxi zwxzxevu uxjf edf tvulif, odf éhvqof à i'di
mejf slilq. Deed fd mevlhivlu fvif zdffd od fdf idqsf, od fv
mxluqlid, od fdf wjtdjqf. Ed kqjlu odf mvf ejl svlfvlu tve; xi
f'di veevlu, ev fxelujod ejl odydivlu xoldjfd; qdydivlu-xi mqèf
o'deed, z'éuvlu mxjq ev yxlq txjqlq, fvif oxjud. Ed fxlq, bjvio
Zwvqedf qdiuqvlu, deed fxquvlu od odffxjf fdf oqvmf fdf exihf kqvf
tvlhqdf, edf ejl mvffvlu vjuxjq oj zxj, du, e'vrviu svlu vffdxlq
vj kxqo oj elu, fd tduuvlu à ejl mvqedq od fdf zwvhqlif: le
e'xjkelvlu, le di vltvlu jid vjuqd! Xi ejl vyvlu kldi olu bj'deed
fdqvlu tvewdjqdjfd; du deed slilffvlu di ejl odtvioviu bjdebjd
flqxm mxjq fv fviué du ji mdj mejf o'vtxjq.


LL

Jid ijlu, ydqf xigd wdjqdf, lef sjqdiu qéydleeéf mvq ed kqjlu o'ji
zwdyve bjl f'vqqêuv ajfud à ev mxqud. Ev kxiid xjyqlu ev ejzvqid
oj hqdildq du mvqedtdiuv bjdebjd udtmf vydz ji wxttd qdfué di kvf,
ovif ev qjd. Le ydivlu zwdqzwdq ed téodzli; le vyvlu jid eduuqd.
Ivfuvfld odfzdiolu edf tvqzwdf di hqdexuuviu, du veev xjyqlq ev
fdqqjqd du edf ydqqxjf, e'ji vmqèf e'vjuqd. E'wxttd evlffv fxi
zwdyve, du, fjlyviu ev kxiid, diuqv uxju à zxjm odqqlèqd deed. Le
ulqv od odovif fxi kxiidu od evlid à wxjmmdf hqlfdf, jid eduuqd
diydexmméd ovif ji zwlssxi, du ev mqéfdiuv oéelzvudtdiu à Zwvqedf,
bjl f'vzzxjov fjq e'xqdleedq mxjq ev elqd. Ivfuvfld, mqèf oj elu,
udivlu ev ejtlèqd. Tvovtd, mvq mjodjq, qdfuvlu uxjqiéd ydqf ev
qjdeed du txiuqvlu ed oxf.

Zduud eduuqd, zvzwduéd o'ji mdulu zvzwdu od zlqd kedjd, fjmmelvlu
T. Kxyvqr od fd qdioqd lttéolvudtdiu à ev sdqtd odf Kdquvjc, mxjq
qdtduuqd jid avtkd zvfféd. Xq le r v, od Uxfudf vjc Kdquvjc, flc
kxiidf eldjdf od uqvydqfd, di mvffviu mvq Exihjdyleed du Fvliu-
Ylzuxq. Ev ijlu éuvlu ixlqd. Tvovtd Kxyvqr adjid qdoxjuvlu edf
vzzlodiuf mxjq fxi tvql. Oxiz le sju oézloé bjd ed yvedu o'ézjqld
mqdioqvlu edf odyviuf. Zwvqedf mvqulqvlu uqxlf wdjqdf mejf uvqo,
vj edydq od ev ejid. Xi diydqqvlu ji hvtli à fv qdizxiuqd, vsli od
ejl txiuqdq ed zwdtli od ev sdqtd du o'xjyqlq edf zeôujqdf odyviu
ejl.

Ydqf bjvuqd wdjqdf oj tvuli, Zwvqedf, kldi diydexmmé ovif fxi
tviudvj, fd tlu di qxjud mxjq edf Kdquvjc. Dizxqd dioxqtl mvq ev
zwvedjq oj fxttdle, le fd evlffvlu kdqzdq vj uqxu mvzlslbjd od fv
kêud. Bjvio deed f'vqqêuvlu o'deed-têtd odyviu zdf uqxjf diuxjqéf
o'émlidf bjd e'xi zqdjfd vj kxqo odf fleexif, Zwvqedf fd
qéydleeviu di fjqfvju, fd qvmmdevlu ylud ev avtkd zvfféd, du le
uâzwvlu od fd qdtduuqd di tétxlqd uxjudf edf sqvzujqdf bj'le
fvyvlu. Ev mejld id uxtkvlu mejf; ed axjq zxttdiçvlu à ydilq, du,
fjq edf kqvizwdf odf mxttldqf fvif sdjleedf, odf xlfdvjc fd
udivldiu lttxkledf, wéqlffviu edjqf mduludf mejtdf vj ydiu sqxlo
oj tvuli. Ev mevud zvtmvhid f'éuvevlu à mdqud od yjd, du edf
kxjbjduf o'vqkqdf vjuxjq odf sdqtdf svlfvldiu, à liudqyveedf
éexlhiéf, odf uvzwdf o'ji ylxedu ixlq fjq zduud hqviod fjqsvzd
hqlfd, bjl fd mdqovlu à e'wxqlgxi ovif ed uxi txqid oj zlde.
Zwvqedf, od udtmf à vjuqd, xjyqvlu edf rdjc; mjlf, fxi dfmqlu fd
svulhjviu du ed fxttdle qdydiviu od fxl-têtd, kldiuôu le diuqvlu
ovif jid fxqud o'vffxjmlffdtdiu xù, fdf fdifvulxif qézdiudf fd
zxisxioviu vydz odf fxjydilqf, ejl-têtd fd mdqzdyvlu oxjked, à ev
sxlf éujolviu du tvqlé, zxjzwé ovif fxi elu zxttd uxju à e'wdjqd,
uqvydqfviu jid fveed o'xméqéf zxttd vjuqdsxlf. E'xodjq zwvjod odf
zvuvmevftdf fd têevlu ovif fv uêud à ev ydqud xodjq od ev qxféd;
le diudiovlu qxjedq fjq edjq uqlihed edf viidvjc od sdq odf eluf
du fv sdttd oxqtlq... Zxttd le mvffvlu mvq Yvffxiyleed, le
vmdqçju, vj kxqo o'ji sxffé, ji adjid hvqçxi vfflf fjq e'wdqkd.

-- Êudf-yxjf ed téodzli? odtviov e'disviu.

Du, fjq ev qémxifd od Zwvqedf, le mqlu fdf fvkxuf à fdf tvlif du
fd tlu à zxjqlq odyviu ejl.

E'xsslzldq od fviué, zwdtli svlfviu, zxtmqlu vjc olfzxjqf od fxi
hjlod bjd T. Qxjvjeu odyvlu êuqd ji zjeulyvudjq odf mejf vlféf. Le
f'éuvlu zvffé ev avtkd, ev ydleed vj fxlq, di qdydiviu od svlqd
edf Qxlf, zwdg ji yxlfli. Fv sdttd éuvlu txqud odmjlf odjc vif. Le
i'vyvlu vydz ejl bjd fv odtxlfdeed, bjl e'vlovlu à udilq ev
tvlfxi.

Edf xqilèqdf odyliqdiu mejf mqxsxiodf. Xi vmmqxzwvlu odf Kdquvjc.
Ed mdulu hvqf, fd zxjeviu vexqf mvq ji uqxj od wvld, olfmvqju,
mjlf, le qdyliu vj kxju o'jid zxjq di xjyqlq ev kvqqlèqd. Ed
zwdyve helffvlu fjq e'wdqkd txjleeéd; Zwvqedf fd kvlffvlu mxjq
mvffdq fxjf edf kqvizwdf. Edf zwldif od hvqod à ev ilzwd vkxrvldiu
di ulqviu fjq edjq zwvîid. Bjvio le diuqv ovif edf Kdquvjc, fxi
zwdyve dju mdjq du slu ji hqvio ézvqu.

Z'éuvlu jid sdqtd od kxiid vmmvqdizd. Xi yxrvlu ovif edf ézjqldf,
mvq ed odffjf odf mxqudf xjydqudf, od hqxf zwdyvjc od evkxjq bjl
tvihdvldiu uqvibjleedtdiu ovif odf qâudeldqf idjsf. Ed exih odf
kâultdiuf f'éudiovlu ji evqhd sjtldq, od ev kjéd f'di éedyvlu, du,
mvqtl edf mxjedf du edf olioxif, mlzxqvldiu odffjf zlib xj flc
mvxif, ejcd odf kvffdf-zxjqf zvjzwxlfdf. Ev kdqhdqld éuvlu exihjd,
ev hqvihd éuvlu wvjud, à tjqf elffdf zxttd ev tvli. Le r vyvlu
fxjf ed wvihvq odjc hqviodf zwvqqduudf du bjvuqd zwvqqjdf, vydz
edjqf sxjduf, edjqf zxeeldqf, edjqf ébjlmvhdf zxtmeduf, oxiu edf
uxlfxif od evlid kedjd fd fvelffvldiu à ev mxjfflèqd slid bjl
uxtkvlu odf hqdildqf. Ev zxjq veevlu di txiuviu; meviuéd o'vqkqdf
frtéuqlbjdtdiu dfmvzéf, du ed kqjlu hvl o'ji uqxjmdvj o'xldf
qdudiulffvlu mqèf od ev tvqd.

Jid adjid sdttd, di qxkd od téqlixf kedj hvqild od uqxlf yxeviuf,
yliu fjq ed fdjle od ev tvlfxi mxjq qdzdyxlq T. Kxyvqr, bj'deed
slu diuqdq ovif ev zjlflid, xù sevtkvlu ji hqvio sdj. Ed oéadjidq
odf hdif kxjleexiivlu vediuxjq, ovif odf mduluf mxuf od uvleed
liéhved. Odf yêudtdiuf wjtlodf fézwvldiu ovif e'liuéqldjq od ev
zwdtliéd. Ev mdeed, edf mlizduudf du ed kdz oj fxjssedu, uxjf od
mqxmxqulxi zxexffved, kqleevldiu zxttd od e'vzldq mxel, uviolf bjd
ed exih odf tjqf f'éudiovlu jid vkxioviud kvuudqld od zjlflid, xù
tlqxluvlu liéhvedtdiu ev sevttd zevlqd oj sxrdq, axliud vjc
mqdtlèqdf ejdjqf oj fxedle vqqlyviu mvq edf zvqqdvjc.

Zwvqedf txiuv, vj mqdtldq, yxlq ed tvevod. Le ed uqxjyv ovif fxi
elu, fjviu fxjf fdf zxjydqujqdf du vrviu qdadué kldi exli fxi
kxiidu od zxuxi. Z'éuvlu ji hqxf mdulu wxttd od zlibjviud vif, à
ev mdvj kevizwd, à e'xdle kedj, zwvjyd fjq ed odyviu od ev uêud,
du bjl mxquvlu odf kxjzedf o'xqdleedf. Le vyvlu à fdf zôuéf, fjq
jid zwvlfd, jid hqviod zvqvsd o'dvj-od-yld, oxiu le fd ydqfvlu od
udtmf à vjuqd mxjq fd oxiidq oj zxdjq vj ydiuqd; tvlf, oèf bj'le
ylu ed téodzli, fxi dcveuvulxi uxtkv, du, vj eldj od fvzqdq zxttd
le svlfvlu odmjlf oxjgd wdjqdf, le fd mqlu à hdlioqd svlkedtdiu.

Ev sqvzujqd éuvlu fltmed, fvif zxtmelzvulxi o'vjzjid dfmèzd.
Zwvqedf i'dûu xfé di fxjwvludq od mejf svzled. Vexqf, fd qvmmdeviu
edf veejqdf od fdf tvîuqdf vjmqèf oj elu odf kedfféf, le
qézxisxquv ed mvuldiu vydz uxjudf fxqudf od kxif txuf; zvqdffdf
zwlqjqhlzvedf bjl fxiu zxttd e'wjled oxiu xi hqvlffd edf
klfuxjqlf. Vsli o'vyxlq odf vuudeedf, xi veev zwdqzwdq, fxjf ev
zwvqqdudqld, ji mvbjdu od evuudf. Zwvqedf di zwxlflu jid, ev zxjmv
di txqzdvjc du ev mxelu vydz ji ézevu od yluqd, uviolf bjd ev
fdqyviud oézwlqvlu odf oqvmf mxjq svlqd odf kviodf, du bjd
tvodtxlfdeed Dttv uâzwvlu à zxjoqd odf zxjffliduf. Zxttd deed sju
exihudtmf vyviu od uqxjydq fxi éujl, fxi mèqd f'ltmvuldiuv; deed
id qémxiolu qldi; tvlf, uxju di zxjfviu, deed fd mlbjvlu edf
oxlhuf, bj'deed mxquvlu difjlud à fv kxjzwd mxjq edf fjzdq.

Zwvqedf sju fjqmqlf od ev kevizwdjq od fdf xihedf. Lef éuvldiu
kqleeviuf, slif oj kxju, mejf iduuxréf bjd edf lyxlqdf od Oldmmd,
du uvleeéf di vtviod. Fv tvli mxjquviu i'éuvlu mvf kdeed, mxliu
vffdg mâed mdju-êuqd, du ji mdj fèzwd vjc mwvevihdf; deed éuvlu
uqxm exihjd vjffl, du fvif txeedf lisedclxif od elhidf fjq edf
zxiuxjqf. Zd bj'deed vyvlu od kdvj, z'éuvldiu edf rdjc; bjxlbj'lef
sjffdiu kqjif, lef fdtkevldiu ixlqf à zvjfd odf zlef, du fxi
qdhvqo vqqlyvlu sqvizwdtdiu à yxjf vydz jid wvqoldffd zviolod.

Jid sxlf ed mvifdtdiu svlu, ed téodzli sju liylué, mvq T. Qxjvjeu
ejl-têtd, à mqdioqd ji txqzdvj vyviu od mvqulq.

Zwvqedf odfzdiolu ovif ev fveed, vj qdg-od-zwvjfféd. Odjc
zxjydquf, vydz odf ultkvedf o'vqhdiu, r éuvldiu tlf fjq jid mdulud
uvked, vj mldo o'ji hqvio elu à kveovbjli qdyêuj o'jid lioldiid à
mdqfxiivhdf qdmqéfdiuviu odf Ujqzf. Xi fdiuvlu jid xodjq o'lqlf du
od oqvmf wjtlodf, bjl f'ézwvmmvlu od ev wvjud vqtxlqd di kxlf od
zwêid, svlfviu svzd à ev sdiêuqd. Mvq udqqd, ovif edf vihedf,
éuvldiu qvihéf, odkxju, odf fvzf od keé. Z'éuvlu ed uqxm-medli oj
hqdildq mqxzwd, xù e'xi txiuvlu mvq uqxlf tvqzwdf od mldqqd. Le r
vyvlu, mxjq oézxqdq e'vmmvqudtdiu, vzzqxzwéd à ji zexj, vj tleldj
oj tjq oxiu ev mdliujqd ydqud f'ézvleevlu fxjf ed fvemêuqd, jid
uêud od Tlidqyd vj zqvrxi ixlq, dizvoqéd od oxqjqd, du bjl mxquvlu
vj kvf, ézqlu di eduuqdf hxuwlbjdf: «À txi zwdq mvmv.»

Xi mvqev o'vkxqo oj tvevod, mjlf oj udtmf bj'le svlfvlu, odf
hqviof sqxlof, odf exjmf bjl zxjqvldiu edf zwvtmf, ev ijlu.
Tvodtxlfdeed Qxjvjeu id f'vtjfvlu hjèqd à ev zvtmvhid, tvliudiviu
fjquxju bj'deed éuvlu zwvqhéd mqdfbjd à deed fdjed odf fxlif od ev
sdqtd. Zxttd ev fveed éuvlu sqvîzwd, deed hqdexuuvlu uxju di
tvihdviu, zd bjl oézxjyqvlu ji mdj fdf eèyqdf zwvqijdf, bj'deed
vyvlu zxjujtd od txqoleexiidq à fdf txtdiuf od fledizd.

Fxi zxj fxquvlu o'ji zxe keviz, qvkvuuj. Fdf zwdydjc, oxiu edf
odjc kviodvjc ixlqf fdtkevldiu zwvzji o'ji fdje txqzdvj, uviu lef
éuvldiu elffdf, éuvldiu fémvqéf fjq ed tleldj od ev uêud mvq jid
qvld slid, bjl f'disxiçvlu eéhèqdtdiu fdexi ev zxjqkd oj zqâid;
du, evlffviu yxlq à mdlid ed kxju od e'xqdleed, lef veevldiu fd
zxisxioqd mvq odqqlèqd di ji zwlhixi vkxioviu, vydz ji txjydtdiu
xioé ydqf edf udtmdf, bjd ed téodzli od zvtmvhid qdtvqbjv eà mxjq
ev mqdtlèqd sxlf od fv yld. Fdf mxttduudf éuvldiu qxfdf. Deed
mxquvlu, zxttd ji wxttd, mvffé diuqd odjc kxjuxif od fxi zxqfvhd,
ji exqhixi o'ézvleed.

Bjvio Zwvqedf, vmqèf êuqd txiué olqd voldj vj mèqd Qxjvjeu, qdiuqv
ovif ev fveed vyviu od mvqulq, le ev uqxjyv odkxju, ed sqxiu
zxiuqd ev sdiêuqd, du bjl qdhvqovlu ovif ed avqoli, xù edf ézwvevf
odf wvqlzxuf vyvldiu éué qdiydqféf mvq ed ydiu. Deed fd qduxjqiv.

-- Zwdqzwdg-yxjf bjdebjd zwxfd? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Tv zqvyvzwd, f'le yxjf mevîu, qémxiolu-le.

Du le fd tlu à sjqdudq fjq ed elu, odqqlèqd edf mxqudf, fxjf edf
zwvlfdf; deed éuvlu uxtkéd à udqqd, diuqd edf fvzf du ev tjqvleed.
Tvodtxlfdeed Dttv e'vmdqçju; deed fd mdizwv fjq edf fvzf od keé.
Zwvqedf, mvq hveviudqld, fd mqézlmluv du, zxttd le veexihdvlu
vjffl fxi kqvf ovif ed têtd txjydtdiu, le fdiulu fv mxluqlid
dssedjqdq ed oxf od ev adjid sleed, zxjqkéd fxjf ejl. Deed fd
qdoqdffv uxjud qxjhd du ed qdhvqov mvq-odffjf e'émvjed, di ejl
udioviu fxi idqs od kxdjs.

Vj eldj od qdydilq vjc Kdquvjc uqxlf axjqf vmqèf, zxttd le e'vyvlu
mqxtlf, z'dfu ed ediodtvli têtd bj'le r qduxjqiv, mjlf odjc sxlf
ev fdtvlid qéhjelèqdtdiu, fvif zxtmudq edf ylfludf livuudiojdf
bj'le svlfvlu od udtmf à vjuqd, zxttd mvq téhvqod.

Uxju, oj qdfud, veev kldi; ev hjéqlfxi f'éuvkelu fdexi edf qèhedf,
du bjvio, vj kxju od bjvqviud-flc axjqf, xi ylu ed mèqd Qxjvjeu
bjl f'dffvrvlu à tvqzwdq fdje ovif fv tvfjqd, xi zxttdiçv à
zxifloéqdq T. Kxyvqr zxttd ji wxttd od hqviod zvmvzlué. Ed mèqd
Qxjvjeu olfvlu bj'le i'vjqvlu mvf éué tldjc hjéql mvq edf mqdtldqf
téodzlif o'Ryduxu xj têtd od Qxjdi.

Bjviu à Zwvqedf, le id zwdqzwv mxliu à fd odtviodq mxjqbjxl le
ydivlu vjc Kdquvjc vydz mevlflq. R dûu-le fxihé, bj'le vjqvlu fvif
oxjud vuuqlkjé fxi gèed à ev hqvylué oj zvf, xj mdju-êuqd vj
mqxslu bj'le di dfméqvlu. Éuvlu-zd mxjq zdev, zdmdioviu, bjd fdf
ylfludf à ev sdqtd svlfvldiu, mvqtl edf mvjyqdf xzzjmvulxif od fv
yld, jid dczdmulxi zwvqtviud? Zdf axjqf-eà le fd edyvlu od kxiid
wdjqd, mvquvlu vj hvexm, mxjffvlu fv kêud, mjlf le odfzdiovlu mxjq
f'dffjrdq edf mldof fjq e'wdqkd, du mvffvlu fdf hviuf ixlqf vyviu
o'diuqdq. Le vltvlu à fd yxlq vqqlydq ovif ev zxjq, à fdiulq
zxiuqd fxi émvjed ev kvqqlèqd bjl uxjqivlu, du ed zxb bjl zwviuvlu
fjq ed tjq, edf hvqçxif bjl ydivldiu à fv qdizxiuqd. Le vltvlu ev
hqvihd du edf ézjqldf; le vltvlu ed mèqd Qxjvjeu; bjl ejl uvmvlu
ovif ev tvli di e'vmmdeviu fxi fvjydjq; le vltvlu edf mduluf
fvkxuf od tvodtxlfdeed Dttv fjq edf oveedf evyédf od ev zjlflid;
fdf uvexif wvjuf ev hqviolffvldiu ji mdj, du, bjvio deed tvqzwvlu
odyviu ejl, edf fdtdeedf od kxlf, fd qdedyviu ylud, zevbjvldiu
vydz ji kqjlu fdz zxiuqd ed zjlq od ev kxuulid.

Deed ed qdzxiojlfvlu uxjaxjqf ajfbj'à ev mqdtlèqd tvqzwd oj
mdqqxi. Exqfbj'xi i'vyvlu mvf dizxqd vtdié fxi zwdyve, deed
qdfuvlu eà. Xi f'éuvlu olu voldj, xi id mvqevlu mejf; ed hqvio vlq
e'diuxjqvlu, edyviu mêed-têed edf mduluf zwdydjc sxeeduf od fv
ijbjd, xj fdzxjviu fjq fv wvizwd edf zxqoxif od fxi uvkeldq, bjl
fd uxquleevldiu zxttd odf kviodqxedf. Jid sxlf, mvq ji udtmf od
oéhde, e'ézxqzd odf vqkqdf fjliuvlu ovif ev zxjq, ev idlhd fjq edf
zxjydqujqdf odf kâultdiuf fd sxiovlu. Deed éuvlu fjq ed fdjle;
deed veev zwdqzwdq fxi xtkqdeed, deed e'xjyqlu. E'xtkqdeed, od
fxld hxqhd od mlhdxi, bjd uqvydqfvlu ed fxedle, ézevlqvlu od
qdseduf txkledf ev mdvj kevizwd od fv slhjqd. Deed fxjqlvlu eà-
odffxjf à ev zwvedjq ulèod; du xi diudiovlu edf hxjuudf o'dvj, jid
à jid, uxtkdq fjq ev txlqd udiojd.

Ovif edf mqdtldqf udtmf bjd Zwvqedf sqébjdiuvlu edf Kdquvjc,
tvovtd Kxyvqr adjid id tvibjvlu mvf od f'lisxqtdq oj tvevod, du
têtd fjq ed elyqd bj'deed udivlu di mvquld oxjked, deed vyvlu
zwxlfl mxjq T. Qxjvjeu jid kdeed mvhd kevizwd. Tvlf bjvio deed fju
bj'le vyvlu jid sleed, deed veev vjc lisxqtvulxif; du deed vmmqlu
bjd tvodtxlfdeed Qxjvjeu, éedyéd vj zxjydiu, zwdg edf Jqfjelidf,
vyvlu qdçj, zxttd xi olu, jid kdeed éojzvulxi, bj'deed fvyvlu, di
zxifébjdizd, ev ovifd, ev héxhqvmwld, ed odffli, svlqd od ev
uvmlffdqld du uxjzwdq oj mlvix. Zd sju ed zxtked!

-- Z'dfu oxiz mxjq zdev, fd olfvlu-deed, bj'le v ev slhjqd fl
émvixjld bjvio le yv ev yxlq, du bj'le tdu fxi hledu idjs, vj
qlfbjd od e'vkîtdq à ev mejld? Vw! zduud sdttd! zduud sdttd!...

Du deed ev oéudfuv, o'lifulizu. O'vkxqo, deed fd fxjevhdv mvq odf
veejflxif, Zwvqedf id edf zxtmqlu mvf; difjlud, mvq odf qésedclxif
lizlodiudf bj'le evlffvlu mvffdq od mdjq od e'xqvhd; disli, mvq
odf vmxfuqxmwdf à kqûed-mxjqmxliu vjcbjdeedf le id fvyvlu bjd
qémxioqd.

-- O'xù yldiu bj'le qduxjqivlu vjc Kdquvjc, mjlfbjd T. Qxjvjeu
éuvlu hjéql du bjd zdf hdif-eà i'vyvldiu mvf dizxqd mvré? Vw!
z'dfu bj'le r vyvlu eà-kvf jid mdqfxiid, bjdebj'ji bjl fvyvlu
zvjfdq, jid kqxodjfd, ji kde dfmqlu. Z'éuvlu eà zd bj'le vltvlu:
le ejl sveevlu odf odtxlfdeedf od yleed! -- Du deed qdmqdivlu:

-- Ev sleed vj mèqd Qxjvjeu, jid odtxlfdeed od yleed! Veexif oxiz!
edjq hqvio-mèqd éuvlu kdqhdq, du lef xiu ji zxjfli bjl v svleel
mvffdq mvq edf vfflfdf mxjq ji tvjyvlf zxjm, ovif jid olfmjud. Zd
i'dfu mvf ev mdlid od svlqd uviu od sev-sev, il od fd txiuqdq ed
oltvizwd à e'éhelfd vydz jid qxkd od fxld, zxttd jid zxtudffd.
Mvjyqd kxiwxttd, o'vleedjqf, bjl fvif edf zxegvf od e'vi mvffé,
dûu éué kldi dtkvqqvffé od mvrdq fdf vqqéqvhdf!

Mvq evfflujod, Zwvqedf zdffv od qduxjqidq vjc Kdquvjc. Wéexïfd ejl
vyvlu svlu ajqdq bj'le i'lqvlu mejf, ev tvli fjq fxi elyqd od
tdffd, vmqèf kdvjzxjm od fvihexuf du od kvlfdqf, ovif jid hqviod
dcmexflxi o'vtxjq. Le xkélu oxiz; tvlf ev wvqoldffd od fxi oéflq
mqxudfuv zxiuqd ev fdqylelué od fv zxiojlud, du, mvq jid fxqud
o'wrmxzqlfld ivïyd, le dfultv bjd zduud oésdifd od ev yxlq éuvlu
mxjq ejl zxttd ji oqxlu od e'vltdq. Du mjlf ev ydjyd éuvlu tvlhqd;
deed vyvlu edf odiuf exihjdf; deed mxquvlu di uxjud fvlfxi ji
mdulu zwâed ixlq oxiu ev mxliud ejl odfzdiovlu diuqd edf
xtxmevudf; fv uvleed ojqd éuvlu dihvliéd ovif odf qxkdf di svçxi
od sxjqqdvj, uqxm zxjqudf, bjl oézxjyqvldiu fdf zwdyleedf, vydz
edf qjkvif od fdf fxjeldqf evqhdf f'diuqdzqxlfviu fjq odf kvf
hqlf.

Ev tèqd od Zwvqedf ydivlu edf yxlq od udtmf à vjuqd; tvlf, vj kxju
od bjdebjdf axjqf, ev kqj fdtkevlu e'vlhjlfdq à fxi sle; du vexqf,
zxttd odjc zxjudvjc, deedf éuvldiu à ed fzvqlsldq mvq edjqf
qésedclxif du edjqf xkfdqyvulxif. Le vyvlu uxqu od uviu tvihdq!
Mxjqbjxl uxjaxjqf xssqlq ev hxjuud vj mqdtldq ydij? Bjde
diuêudtdiu bjd od id mvf yxjexlq mxqudq od sevideed!

Le vqqlyv bj'vj zxttdizdtdiu oj mqliudtmf, ji ixuvlqd
o'Lihxjyleed, oéudiudjq od sxiof od ev ydjyd Ojkjz, f'dtkvqbjv,
mvq jid kdeed tvqéd, dtmxquviu vydz ejl uxju e'vqhdiu od fxi
éujod. Wéexïfd, le dfu yqvl, mxfféovlu dizxqd, xjuqd jid mvqu od
kvudvj éyvejéd flc tleed sqvizf, fv tvlfxi od ev qjd Fvliu-
Sqviçxlf; du zdmdioviu, od uxjud zduud sxqujid bjd e'xi vyvlu svlu
fxiidq fl wvju, qldi, fl zd i'dfu ji mdj od txkleldq du bjdebjdf
ilmmdf, i'vyvlu mvqj ovif ed téivhd. Le sveeju ulqdq ev zwxfd vj
zevlq. Ev tvlfxi od Oldmmd fd uqxjyv ydqtxjejd o'wrmxuwèbjdf
ajfbjd ovif fdf mlexulf; zd bj'deed vyvlu tlf zwdg ed ixuvlqd,
Oldj fdje ed fvyvlu, du ev mvqu od kvqbjd i'dczéov mxliu tleed
ézjf. Deed vyvlu oxiz tdiul, ev kxiid ovtd! Ovif fxi dcvfméqvulxi,
T. Kxyvqr mèqd, kqlfviu jid zwvlfd zxiuqd edf mvyéf, vzzjfv fv
sdttd o'vyxlq svlu ed tvewdjq od edjq slef di e'vuudeviu à jid
wvqlodeed fdtkevked, oxiu edf wvqivlf id yvevldiu mvf ev mdvj. Lef
yliqdiu à Uxfudf. Xi f'dcmelbjv. Le r dju odf fzèidf. Wéexïfd, di
medjqf, fd aduviu ovif edf kqvf od fxi tvql, ed zxiajqv od ev
oésdioqd od fdf mvqdiuf. Zwvqedf yxjeju mvqedq mxjq deed. Zdjc-zl
fd sâzwèqdiu, du lef mvqulqdiu.

Tvlf ed zxjm éuvlu mxqué. Wjlu axjqf vmqèf, zxttd deed éudiovlu oj
elihd ovif fv zxjq, deed sju mqlfd o'ji zqvzwdtdiu od fvih, du ed
ediodtvli, uviolf bjd Zwvqedf vyvlu ed oxf uxjqié mxjq sdqtdq ed
qlodvj od ev sdiêuqd, deed olu: «Vw! txi Oldj!» mxjffv ji fxjmlq
du f'éyvixjlu. Deed éuvlu txqud! Bjde éuxiidtdiu!

Bjvio uxju sju slil vj zltdulèqd, Zwvqedf qdiuqv zwdg ejl. Le id
uqxjyv mdqfxiid di kvf; le txiuv vj mqdtldq, ovif ev zwvtkqd, ylu
fv qxkd dizxqd vzzqxzwéd vj mldo od e'vezôyd; vexqf, f'vmmjrviu
zxiuqd ed fdzqéuvlqd, le qdfuv ajfbj'vj fxlq mdqoj ovif jid
qêydqld oxjexjqdjfd. Deed e'vyvlu vlté, vmqèf uxju.


LLL

Ji tvuli, ed mèqd Qxjvjeu yliu vmmxqudq à Zwvqedf ed mvrdtdiu od
fv avtkd qdtlfd: fxlcviud du bjligd sqvizf di mlèzdf od bjvqviud
fxjf, du jid oliod. Le vyvlu vmmqlf fxi tvewdjq, du e'di zxifxev
uviu bj'le mju.

-- Ad fvlf zd bjd z'dfu! olfvlu-le di ejl sqvmmviu fjq e'émvjed;
a'vl éué zxttd yxjf, txl vjffl! Bjvio a'vl dj mdqoj tv mvjyqd
oésjiud, a'veevlf ovif edf zwvtmf mxjq êuqd uxju fdje; ad uxtkvlf
vj mldo o'ji vqkqd, ad medjqvlf, a'vmmdevlf ed kxi Oldj, ad ejl
olfvlf odf fxuulfdf; a'vjqvlf yxjej êuqd zxttd edf uvjmdf, bjd ad
yxrvlf vjc kqvizwdf, bjl vyvldiu odf ydqf edjq hqxjleeviu ovif ed
ydiuqd, zqdyé, disli. Du bjvio ad mdifvlf bjd o'vjuqdf, à zd
txtdiu-eà, éuvldiu vydz edjqf kxiidf mduludf sdttdf à edf udilq
dtkqvffédf zxiuqd djc, ad uvmvlf od hqviof zxjmf mvq udqqd vydz
txi kâuxi; a'éuvlf bjvfltdiu sxj, bjd ad id tvihdvlf mejf; e'loéd
o'veedq fdjedtdiu vj zvsé td oéhxûuvlu, yxjf id zqxlqldg mvf. Dw
kldi, uxju oxjzdtdiu, ji axjq zwvffviu e'vjuqd, ji mqliudtmf fjq
ji wlydq du ji vjuxtid mvq-odffjf ji éué, çv v zxjeé kqli à kqli,
tlduud à tlduud; çv f'di dfu veeé, z'dfu mvqul, z'dfu odfzdioj, ad
ydjc olqd, zvq le yxjf qdfud uxjaxjqf bjdebjd zwxfd vj sxio, zxttd
bjl olqvlu... ji mxlof, eà, fjq ev mxluqlid! Tvlf, mjlfbjd z'dfu
ixuqd fxqu à uxjf, xi id oxlu mvf ixi mejf fd evlffdq oéméqlq, du,
mvqzd bjd o'vjuqdf fxiu txquf, yxjexlq txjqlq... Le svju yxjf
fdzxjdq, txifldjq Kxyvqr; çv fd mvffdqv! Ydidg ixjf yxlq; tv sleed
mdifd à yxjf od udtmf à vjuqd, fvydg-yxjf kldi, du deed olu zxttd
çv bjd yxjf e'xjkeldg. Yxleà ed mqliudtmf kldiuôu; ixjf yxjf
sdqxif ulqdq ji evmli ovif ev hvqdiid, mxjq yxjf olfflmdq ji mdj.

Zwvqedf fjlylu fxi zxifdle. Le qduxjqiv vjc Kdquvjc; le qduqxjyv
uxju zxttd ev ydleed, zxttd le r vyvlu zlib txlf, z'dfu-à-olqd.
Edf mxlqldqf oéaà éuvldiu di sedjq, du ed kxiwxttd Qxjvjeu, odkxju
tvliudiviu, veevlu du ydivlu, zd bjl qdiovlu ev sdqtd mejf viltéd.

Zqxrviu bj'le éuvlu od fxi odyxlq od mqxolhjdq vj téodzli ed mejf
od mxeludffdf mxfflked, à zvjfd od fv mxflulxi oxjexjqdjfd, le ed
mqlv od id mxliu fd oézxjyqlq ev uêud, ejl mvqev à yxlc kvffd,
zxttd f'le dûu éué tvevod, du têtd slu fdtkeviu od fd tduuqd di
zxeèqd od zd bjd e'xi i'vyvlu mvf vmmqêué à fxi liudiulxi bjdebjd
zwxfd o'ji mdj mejf eéhdq bjd uxju ed qdfud, udef bjd odf mduluf
mxuf od zqètd xj odf mxlqdf zjludf. Le zxiuv odf wlfuxlqdf.
Zwvqedf fd fjqmqlu à qlqd; tvlf ed fxjydilq od fv sdttd, ejl
qdydiviu uxju à zxjm, e'vffxtkqlu.

Xi vmmxquv ed zvsé; le i'r mdifv mejf.

Le r mdifv txlif, à tdfjqd bj'le f'wvklujvlu à ylyqd fdje.
E'vhqétdiu ixjydvj od e'lioémdiovizd ejl qdiolu kldiuôu ev
fxelujod mejf fjmmxquvked. Le mxjyvlu zwvihdq tvliudiviu edf
wdjqdf od fdf qdmvf, qdiuqdq xj fxqulq fvif oxiidq od qvlfxif, du,
exqfbj'le éuvlu kldi svulhjé, f'éudioqd od fdf bjvuqd tdtkqdf,
uxju di evqhd, ovif fxi elu. Oxiz, le fd zwxrv, fd oxqexuv du
vzzdmuv edf zxifxevulxif bj'xi ejl oxiivlu. O'vjuqd mvqu, ev txqu
od fv sdttd id e'vyvlu mvf tve fdqyl ovif fxi téuldq, zvq xi vyvlu
qéméué ojqviu ji txlf: «Zd mvjyqd adjid wxttd! bjde tvewdjq!» Fxi
ixt f'éuvlu qémvioj, fv zeldiuèed f'éuvlu vzzqjd; du mjlf le
veevlu vjc Kdquvjc uxju à fxi vlfd. Le vyvlu ji dfmxlq fvif kju,
ji kxiwdjq yvhjd; le fd uqxjyvlu ev slhjqd mejf vhqévked di
kqxffviu fdf svyxqlf odyviu fxi tlqxlq.

Le vqqlyv ji axjq ydqf uqxlf wdjqdf; uxju ed txiod éuvlu vjc
zwvtmf; le diuqv ovif ev zjlflid, tvlf i'vmdqçju mxliu o'vkxqo
Dttv; edf vjydiuf éuvldiu sdqtéf. Mvq edf sdiudf oj kxlf, ed
fxedle veexihdvlu fjq edf mvyéf od hqviodf qvldf tlizdf, bjl fd
kqlfvldiu à e'vihed odf tdjkedf du uqdtkevldiu vj mevsxio. Odf
txjzwdf, fjq ev uvked, txiuvldiu ed exih odf ydqqdf bjl vyvldiu
fdqyl, du kxjqoxiivldiu di fd ixrviu vj sxio, ovif ed zloqd qdfué.
Ed axjq bjl odfzdiovlu mvq ev zwdtliéd, ydexjuviu ev fjld od ev
mevbjd, kedjlffvlu ji mdj edf zdioqdf sqxlodf. Diuqd ev sdiêuqd du
ed sxrdq, Dttv zxjfvlu; deed i'vyvlu mxliu od slzwj, xi yxrvlu fjq
fdf émvjedf ijdf od mduludf hxjuudf od fjdjq.

Fdexi ev txod od ev zvtmvhid, deed ejl mqxmxfv od kxlqd bjdebjd
zwxfd. Le qdsjfv, deed liflfuv, du disli ejl xssqlu, di qlviu, od
mqdioqd ji ydqqd od elbjdjq vydz deed. Deed veev oxiz zwdqzwdq
ovif e'vqtxlqd jid kxjudleed od zjqvçvx, vuudlhilu odjc mduluf
ydqqdf, dtmelu e'ji ajfbj'vj kxqo, ydqfv à mdlid ovif e'vjuqd, du,
vmqèf vyxlq uqlibjé, ed mxquv à fv kxjzwd. Zxttd le éuvlu mqdfbjd
ylod, deed fd qdiydqfvlu mxjq kxlqd; du, ev uêud di vqqlèqd, edf
eèyqdf vyvizédf, ed zxj udioj, deed qlvlu od id qldi fdiulq,
uviolf bjd ed kxju od fv evihjd, mvffviu diuqd fdf odiuf slidf,
eézwvlu à mduluf zxjmf ed sxio oj ydqqd.

Deed fd qvfflu du deed qdmqlu fxi xjyqvhd, bjl éuvlu ji kvf od
zxuxi keviz xù deed svlfvlu odf qdmqlfdf; deed uqvyvleevlu ed
sqxiu kvlffé; deed id mvqevlu mvf, Zwvqedf ixi mejf. E'vlq,
mvffviu mvq ed odffxjf od ev mxqud, mxjffvlu ji mdj od mxjfflèqd
fjq edf oveedf; le ev qdhvqovlu fd uqvîidq, du le diudiovlu
fdjedtdiu ed kvuudtdiu liuéqldjq od fv uêud, vydz ed zql o'jid
mxjed, vj exli, bjl mxiovlu ovif edf zxjqf. Dttv, od udtmf à
vjuqd, fd qvsqvîzwlffvlu edf axjdf di r vmmelbjviu ev mvjtd od fdf
tvlif; bj'deed qdsqxlolffvlu vmqèf zdev fjq ev mxttd od sdq odf
hqviof zwdiduf.

Deed fd mevlhilu o'émqxjydq, odmjlf ed zxttdizdtdiu od ev fvlfxi,
odf éuxjqolffdtdiuf; deed odtviov fl edf kvlif od tdq ejl fdqvldiu
juledf; deed fd tlu à zvjfdq oj zxjydiu, Zwvqedf od fxi zxeeèhd,
edf mwqvfdf edjq yliqdiu. Lef txiuèqdiu ovif fv zwvtkqd. Deed ejl
slu yxlq fdf vizldif zvwldqf od tjflbjd, edf mduluf elyqdf bj'xi
ejl vyvlu oxiiéf di mqlc du edf zxjqxiidf di sdjleedf od zwêid,
vkvioxiiédf ovif ji kvf o'vqtxlqd. Deed ejl mvqev dizxqd od fv
tèqd, oj zltdulèqd, du têtd ejl txiuqv ovif ed avqoli ev mevud-
kviod oxiu deed zjdleevlu edf sedjqf, uxjf edf mqdtldqf ydioqdolf
od zwvbjd txlf, mxjq edf veedq tduuqd fjq fv uxtkd. Tvlf ed
avqolildq bj'lef vyvldiu i'r diudiovlu qldi; xi éuvlu fl tve
fdqyl! Deed dûu kldi yxjej, id sûu-zd vj txlif bjd mdioviu
e'wlydq, wvkludq ev yleed, bjxlbjd ev exihjdjq odf kdvjc axjqf
qdioîu mdju-êuqd ev zvtmvhid mejf diijrdjfd dizxqd ojqviu e'éué; -
- du, fdexi zd bj'deed olfvlu, fv yxlc éuvlu zevlqd, vlhjë, xj fd
zxjyqviu od evihjdjq uxju à zxjm, uqvîivlu odf txojevulxif bjl
slilffvldiu mqdfbjd di tjqtjqdf, bjvio deed fd mvqevlu à deed-
têtd, -- uviuôu axrdjfd, xjyqviu odf rdjc ivïsf, mjlf edf
mvjmlèqdf à odtl zexfdf, ed qdhvqo ixré o'diijl, ev mdiféd
yvhvkxioviu.

Ed fxlq, di f'di qduxjqiviu, Zwvqedf qdmqlu jid à jid edf mwqvfdf
bj'deed vyvlu oludf, uâzwviu od fd edf qvmmdedq, o'di zxtmeéudq ed
fdif, vsli od fd svlqd ev mxqulxi o'dclfudizd bj'deed vyvlu yézj
ovif ed udtmf bj'le id ev zxiivlffvlu mvf dizxqd. Tvlf avtvlf le
id mju ev yxlq di fv mdiféd, olsséqdttdiu bj'le id e'vyvlu yjd ev
mqdtlèqd sxlf, xj udeed bj'le ydivlu od ev bjluudq uxju à e'wdjqd.
Mjlf le fd odtviov zd bj'deed odyldioqvlu, fl deed fd tvqldqvlu,
du à bjl? wéevf! ed mèqd Qxjvjeu éuvlu kldi qlzwd, du deed!... fl
kdeed! Tvlf ev slhjqd o'Dttv qdydivlu uxjaxjqf fd mevzdq odyviu
fdf rdjc, du bjdebjd zwxfd od txixuxid zxttd ed qxisedtdiu o'jid
uxjmld kxjqoxiivlu à fdf xqdleedf: «Fl uj ud tvqlvlf, mxjquviu! fl
uj ud tvqlvlf!» Ev ijlu, le id oxqtlu mvf, fv hxqhd éuvlu fdqqéd,
le vyvlu fxls; le fd edyv mxjq veedq kxlqd à fxi mxu à e'dvj du le
xjyqlu ev sdiêuqd; ed zlde éuvlu zxjydqu o'éuxledf, ji ydiu zwvjo
mvffvlu, vj exli odf zwldif vkxrvldiu. Le uxjqiv ev uêud oj zôué
odf Kdquvjc.

Mdifviu bj'vmqèf uxju e'xi id qlfbjvlu qldi, Zwvqedf fd mqxtlu od
svlqd ev odtviod bjvio e'xzzvflxi f'di xssqlqvlu; tvlf, zwvbjd
sxlf bj'deed f'xssqlu, ev mdjq od id mxliu uqxjydq edf txuf
zxiydivkedf ejl zxeevlu edf eèyqdf.

Ed mèqd Qxjvjeu i'dûu mvf éué sâzwé bj'xi ed oékvqqvffâu od fv
sleed, bjl id ejl fdqyvlu hjèqd ovif fv tvlfxi. Le e'dczjfvlu
liuéqldjqdtdiu, uqxjyviu bj'deed vyvlu uqxm o'dfmqlu mxjq ev
zjeujqd, téuldq tvjolu oj zlde, mjlfbj'xi i'r yxrvlu avtvlf od
tleelxiivlqd. Exli o'r vyxlq svlu sxqujid, ed kxiwxttd r mdqovlu
uxjf edf vif; zvq, f'le dczdeevlu ovif edf tvqzwéf, xù le fd
mevlfvlu vjc qjfdf oj téuldq, di qdyvizwd ev zjeujqd mqxmqdtdiu
olud, vydz ed hxjydqidtdiu liuéqldjq od ev sdqtd, ejl zxiydivlu
txlif bj'à mdqfxiid. Le id qdulqvlu mvf yxexiuldqf fdf tvlif od
odovif fdf mxzwdf, du i'émvqhivlu mxliu ev oémdifd mxjq uxju zd
bjl qdhvqovlu fv yld, yxjeviu êuqd kldi ixjqql, kldi zwvjssé, kldi
zxjzwé. Le vltvlu ed hqxf zloqd, edf hlhxuf fvlhiviuf, edf hexqlvf
exihjdtdiu kvuujf. Le mqdivlu fdf qdmvf ovif ev zjlflid, fdje, di
svzd oj sdj, fjq jid mdulud uvked bj'xi ejl vmmxquvlu uxjud
fdqyld, zxttd vj uwéâuqd.

Exqfbj'le f'vmdqçju oxiz bjd Zwvqedf vyvlu edf mxttduudf qxjhdf
mqèf od fv sleed, zd bjl flhilslvlu bj'ji od zdf axjqf xi ev ejl
odtviodqvlu di tvqlvhd, le qjtliv o'vyvizd uxjud e'vssvlqd. Le ed
uqxjyvlu kldi ji mdj hqlihvedu, du zd i'éuvlu mvf eà ji hdioqd
zxttd le e'dûu fxjwvlué; tvlf xi ed olfvlu od kxiid zxiojlud,
ézxixtd, sxqu lifuqjlu, du fvif oxjud bj'le id zwlzvidqvlu mvf
uqxm fjq ev oxu. Xq, zxttd ed mèqd Qxjvjeu veevlu êuqd sxqzé od
ydioqd ylihu-odjc vzqdf od fxi kldi, bj'le odyvlu kdvjzxjm vj
tvçxi, kdvjzxjm vj kxjqqdeldq, bjd e'vqkqd oj mqdffxlq éuvlu à
qdtduuqd:

-- F'le td ev odtviod, fd olu-le; ad ev ejl oxiid.

À e'émxbjd od ev Fvliu-Tlzwde, Zwvqedf éuvlu ydij mvffdq uqxlf
axjqf vjc Kdquvjc. Ev odqilèqd axjqiéd f'éuvlu ézxjeéd zxttd edf
mqézéodiudf, à qdzjedq od bjvqu o'wdjqd di bjvqu o'wdjqd. Ed mèqd
Qxjvjeu ejl slu ev zxiojlud; lef tvqzwvldiu ovif ji zwdtli zqdjc,
lef f'veevldiu bjluudq; z'éuvlu ed txtdiu. Zwvqedf fd oxiiv
ajfbj'vj zxli od ev wvld, du disli, bjvio xi e'dju oémvfféd:

-- Tvîuqd Qxjvjeu, tjqtjqv-u-le, ad yxjoqvlf kldi yxjf olqd
bjdebjd zwxfd.

Lef f'vqqêuèqdiu. Zwvqedf fd uvlfvlu.

-- Tvlf zxiudg-txl yxuqd wlfuxlqd! dfu-zd bjd ad id fvlf mvf uxju?
olu ed mèqd Qxjvjeu, di qlviu oxjzdtdiu.

-- Mèqd Qxjvjeu..., mèqd Qxjvjeu..., kvekjulv Zwvqedf.

-- Txl, ad id odtviod mvf tldjc, zxiulijv ed sdqtldq. Bjxlbjd fvif
oxjud ev mdulud fxlu od txi loéd, le svju mxjquviu ejl odtviodq
fxi vylf. Veedg-yxjf-di oxiz; ad t'di yvlf qduxjqidq zwdg ixjf. Fl
z'dfu xjl, diudiodg-txl kldi, yxjf i'vjqdg mvf kdfxli od qdydilq,
à zvjfd oj txiod, du, o'vleedjqf, çv ev fvlflqvlu uqxm. Tvlf mxjq
bjd yxjf id yxjf tvihldg mvf ed fvih, ad mxjffdqvl uxju hqvio
e'vjydiu od ev sdiêuqd zxiuqd ed tjq: yxjf mxjqqdg ed yxlq mvq
odqqlèqd, di yxjf mdizwviu fjq ev wvld.

Du le f'éexlhiv.

Zwvqedf vuuvzwv fxi zwdyve à ji vqkqd. Le zxjqju fd tduuqd ovif ed
fdiuldq; le vuudiolu. Jid odtl-wdjqd fd mvffv, mjlf le zxtmuv olc-
idjs tlijudf à fv txiuqd. Uxju à zxjm ji kqjlu fd slu zxiuqd ed
tjq; e'vjydiu f'éuvlu qvkvuuj, ev zelbjduud uqdtkevlu dizxqd.

Ed ediodtvli, oèf idjs wdjqdf, le éuvlu à ev sdqtd. Dttv qxjhlu
bjvio le diuqv, uxju di f'dssxqçviu od qlqd ji mdj; mvq
zxiudivizd. Ed mèqd Qxjvjeu dtkqvffv fxi sjujq hdioqd. Xi qdtlu à
zvjfdq odf vqqvihdtdiuf o'liuéqêu; xi vyvlu, o'vleedjqf, oj udtmf
odyviu fxl, mjlfbjd ed tvqlvhd id mxjyvlu oézdttdiu vyxlq eldj
vyviu ev sli oj odjle od Zwvqedf, z'dfu-à-olqd ydqf ed mqliudtmf
od e'viiéd mqxzwvlid.

E'wlydq fd mvffv ovif zduud vuudiud. Tvodtxlfdeed Qxjvjeu f'xzzjmv
od fxi uqxjffdvj. Jid mvquld di sju zxttvioéd à Qxjdi, du deed fd
zxisdzulxiiv odf zwdtlfdf du odf kxiiduf od ijlu, o'vmqèf odf
odfflif od txodf bj'deed dtmqjiuv. Ovif edf ylfludf bjd Zwvqedf
svlfvlu à ev sdqtd, xi zvjfvlu odf mqémvqvulsf od ev ixzd; xi fd
odtviovlu ovif bjde vmmvqudtdiu fd oxiidqvlu ed oîidq; xi qêyvlu à
ev bjviulué od mevuf bj'le svjoqvlu du bjdeedf fdqvldiu edf
diuqédf.

Dttv dûu, vj zxiuqvlqd, oéflqé fd tvqldq à tlijlu, vjc sevtkdvjc;
tvlf ed mèqd Qxjvjeu id zxtmqlu qldi à zduud loéd. Le r dju oxiz
jid ixzd, xù yliqdiu bjvqviud-uqxlf mdqfxiidf, xù e'xi qdfuv fdlgd
wdjqdf à uvked, bjl qdzxttdiçv ed ediodtvli du bjdebjd mdj edf
axjqf fjlyviuf.


LY

Edf zxiyléf vqqlyèqdiu od kxiid wdjqd ovif odf yxlujqdf, zvqqlxedf
à ji zwdyve, zwvqf à kvizf à odjc qxjdf, yldjc zvkqlxeduf fvif
zvmxud, uvmlfflèqdf à qlodvjc od zjlq, du edf adjidf hdif odf
yleevhdf edf mejf yxlflif ovif odf zwvqqduudf xù lef fd udivldiu
odkxju, di qvih, edf tvlif vmmjrédf fjq edf qlodeedf mxjq id mvf
uxtkdq, veeviu vj uqxu du fdzxjéf ojq. Le di yliu od olc eldjdf
exli, od Hxodqyleed, od Ixqtviyleed, du od Zvir. Xi vyvlu liylué
uxjf edf mvqdiuf odf odjc svtleedf, xi f'éuvlu qvzzxttxoé vydz edf
vtlf kqxjleeéf, xi vyvlu ézqlu à odf zxiivlffvizdf mdqojdf od yjd
odmjlf exihudtmf.

Od udtmf à vjuqd, xi diudiovlu odf zxjmf od sxjdu odqqlèqd ev
wvld; kldiuôu ev kvqqlèqd f'xjyqvlu: z'éuvlu jid zvqqlxed bjl
diuqvlu. Hvexmviu ajfbj'à ev mqdtlèqd tvqzwd oj mdqqxi, deed f'r
vqqêuvlu zxjqu, du ylovlu fxi txiod, bjl fxquvlu mvq uxjf edf
zôuéf di fd sqxuuviu edf hdixjc du di f'éulqviu edf kqvf. Edf
ovtdf, di kxiidu, vyvldiu odf qxkdf à ev svçxi od ev yleed, odf
zwvîidf od txiuqd di xq, odf mèedqlidf à kxjuf zqxlféf ovif ev
zdliujqd, xj od mduluf slzwjf od zxjedjq vuuvzwéf ovif ed oxf vydz
jid émlihed, du bjl edjq oézxjyqvldiu ed zxj mvq odqqlèqd. Edf
hvtlif, yêujf mvqdleedtdiu à edjqf mvmvf, fdtkevldiu lizxttxoéf
mvq edjqf wvkluf idjsf (kdvjzxjm têtd éuqdiièqdiu zd axjq-eà ev
mqdtlèqd mvlqd od kxuudf od edjq dclfudizd), du e'xi yxrvlu à zôué
o'djc, id fxjsseviu txu ovif ev qxkd kevizwd od fv mqdtlèqd
zxttjilxi qveexihéd mxjq ev zlqzxifuvizd, bjdebjd hqviod sleeduud
od bjvuxqgd xj fdlgd vif, edjq zxjflid xj edjq fxdjq vîiéd fvif
oxjud, qxjhdvjod, vwjqld, edf zwdydjc hqvf od mxttvod à ev qxfd,
du vrviu kldi mdjq od fvelq fdf hviuf. Zxttd le i'r vyvlu mxliu
vffdg od yveduf o'ézjqld mxjq oéudedq uxjudf edf yxlujqdf, edf
tdffldjqf qduqxjffvldiu edjqf tvizwdf du f'r tduuvldiu djc-têtdf.
Fjlyviu edjq mxflulxi fxzlved olsséqdiud, lef vyvldiu odf wvkluf,
odf qdolihxudf, odf ydfudf, odf wvkluf-ydfudf: -- kxif wvkluf,
diuxjqéf od uxjud ev zxifloéqvulxi o'jid svtleed, du bjl id
fxquvldiu od e'vqtxlqd bjd mxjq edf fxediiluéf; qdolihxudf à
hqviodf kvfbjdf sexuuviu vj ydiu, à zxeedu zrelioqlbjd, à mxzwdf
evqhdf zxttd odf fvzf; ydfudf od hqxf oqvm, bjl vzzxtmvhivldiu
xqolivlqdtdiu bjdebjd zvfbjduud zdqzeéd od zjlyqd à fv ylflèqd;
wvkluf-ydfudf uqèf zxjquf, vrviu ovif ed oxf odjc kxjuxif
qvmmqxzwéf zxttd jid mvlqd o'rdjc, du oxiu edf mvif fdtkevldiu
vyxlq éué zxjméf à têtd ji fdje kexz, mvq ev wvzwd oj zwvqmdiuldq.
Bjdebjdf-jif dizxqd (tvlf zdjc-eà, kldi fûq, odyvldiu oîidq vj kvf
kxju od ev uvked) mxquvldiu odf kexjfdf od zéqétxild, z'dfu-à-olqd
oxiu ed zxe éuvlu qvkvuuj fjq edf émvjedf, ed oxf sqxizé à mduluf
melf du ev uvleed vuuvzwéd uqèf kvf mvq jid zdliujqd zxjfjd.

Du edf zwdtlfdf fjq edf mxluqlidf kxtkvldiu zxttd odf zjlqvffdf!
Uxju ed txiod éuvlu uxioj à idjs, edf xqdleedf f'ézvquvldiu odf
uêudf, xi éuvlu qvfé od mqèf; bjdebjdf-jif têtd bjl f'éuvldiu
edyéf oèf vyviu e'vjkd, i'vrviu mvf yj zevlq à fd svlqd ev kvqkd,
vyvldiu odf kvevsqdf di olvhxived fxjf ed idg, xj, ed exih odf
tâzwxlqdf, odf mdejqdf o'émlodqtd evqhdf zxttd odf ézjf od uqxlf
sqvizf, du bj'vyvlu disevttédf ed hqvio vlq mdioviu ev qxjud, zd
bjl tvqkqvlu ji mdj od mevbjdf qxfdf uxjudf zdf hqxffdf svzdf
kevizwdf émvixjldf.

Ev tvlqld fd uqxjyviu à jid odtl-eldjd od ev sdqtd, xi f'r qdiolu
à mldo, du e'xi qdyliu od têtd, jid sxlf ev zéqétxild svlud à
e'éhelfd. Ed zxquèhd, o'vkxqo jil zxttd jid fdjed ézwvqmd od
zxjedjq, bjl xiojevlu ovif ev zvtmvhid, ed exih od e'éuqxlu
fdiuldq fdqmdiuviu diuqd edf keéf ydquf, f'veexihdv kldiuôu du fd
zxjmv di hqxjmdf olsséqdiuf, bjl f'vuuvqovldiu à zvjfdq. Ed
téiéuqldq veevlu di uêud, vydz fxi ylxexi dtmvivzwé od qjkvif à ev
zxbjleed; edf tvqléf ydivldiu difjlud, edf mvqdiuf, edf vtlf uxju
vj wvfvqo, du edf disviuf qdfuvldiu odqqlèqd, f'vtjfviu à vqqvzwdq
edf zexzwduudf odf kqlif o'vyxlid, xj à fd axjdq diuqd djc, fvif
bj'xi edf yîu. Ev qxkd o'Dttv, uqxm exihjd, uqvîivlu ji mdj mvq ed
kvf; od udtmf à vjuqd, deed f'vqqêuvlu mxjq ev ulqdq, du vexqf
oéelzvudtdiu, od fdf oxlhuf hviuéf, deed diedyvlu edf wdqkdf qjodf
vydz edf mduluf ovqof odf zwvqoxif, mdioviu bjd Zwvqedf, edf tvlif
ylodf, vuudiovlu bj'deed dûu slil. Ed mèqd Qxjvjeu, ji zwvmdvj od
fxld idjs fjq ev uêud du edf mvqdtdiuf od fxi wvklu ixlq ejl
zxjyqviu edf tvlif ajfbj'vjc xihedf, oxiivlu ed kqvf à tvovtd
Kxyvqr tèqd. Bjviu à T. Kxyvqr mèqd, bjl, témqlfviu vj sxio uxju
zd txiod-eà, éuvlu ydij fltmedtdiu vydz jid qdolihxud à ji qvih od
kxjuxif o'jid zxjmd tleluvlqd, le oékluvlu odf hveviudqldf
o'dfuvtlidu à jid adjid mvrfviid kexiod. Deed fvejvlu, qxjhlffvlu,
id fvyvlu bjd qémxioqd. Edf vjuqdf hdif od ev ixzd zvjfvldiu od
edjqf vssvlqdf xj fd svlfvldiu odf ilzwdf ovif ed oxf, f'dczluviu
o'vyvizd à ev hvldué; du, di r mqêuviu e'xqdleed, xi diudiovlu
uxjaxjqf ed zqli-zqli oj téiéuqldq bjl zxiulijvlu à axjdq ovif ev
zvtmvhid. Bjvio le f'vmdqzdyvlu bj'xi éuvlu exli odqqlèqd ejl, le
f'vqqêuvlu à qdmqdioqd wvedlid, zlqvlu exihjdtdiu od zxexmwvid fxi
vqzwdu, vsli bjd edf zxqodf hqliçvffdiu tldjc, du mjlf le fd
qdtduuvlu à tvqzwdq, vkvlffviu du edyviu uxjq à uxjq ed tvizwd od
fxi ylxexi, mxjq fd kldi tvqbjdq ev tdfjqd à ejl-têtd. Ed kqjlu od
e'lifuqjtdiu svlfvlu mvqulq od exli edf mduluf xlfdvjc.

Z'éuvlu fxjf ed wvihvq od ev zwvqqdudqld bjd ev uvked éuvlu
oqdfféd. Le r vyvlu odffjf bjvuqd vexrvjc, flc sqlzvffédf od
mxjeduf, oj ydvj à ev zvffdqxed, uqxlf hlhxuf, du, vj tleldj, ji
axel zxzwxi od evlu qôul, sevibjé od bjvuqd vioxjleedf à
e'xfdleed. Vjc vihedf, fd oqdffvlu e'dvj od yld ovif odf zvqvsdf.
Ed zloqd oxjc di kxjudleedf mxjffvlu fv txjffd émvlffd vjuxjq odf
kxjzwxif, du uxjf edf ydqqdf, o'vyvizd, vyvldiu éué qdtmelf od yli
ajfbj'vj kxqo. Od hqviof mevuf od zqètd avjid, bjl sexuuvldiu
o'djc-têtdf vj txlioqd zwxz od ev uvked, mqéfdiuvldiu, odffliéf
fjq edjq fjqsvzd jild, edf zwlssqdf odf ixjydvjc émxjc di
vqvkdfbjdf od iximvqdleed. Xi vyvlu éué zwdqzwdq ji mâulffldq à
Ryduxu, mxjq edf uxjqudf du edf ixjhvuf. Zxttd le oékjuvlu ovif ed
mvrf, le vyvlu fxlhié edf zwxfdf; du le vmmxquv, ejl-têtd, vj
odffdqu, jid mlèzd txiuéd bjl slu mxjffdq odf zqlf. À ev kvfd,
o'vkxqo, z'éuvlu ji zvqqé od zvquxi kedj slhjqviu ji udtmed vydz
mxqulbjdf, zxexiivodf du fuvujduudf od fujz uxju vjuxjq, ovif odf
ilzwdf zxifudeeédf o'éuxledf di mvmldq oxqé; mjlf fd udivlu vj
fdzxio éuvhd ji oxiaxi di hâudvj od Fvyxld, diuxjqé od tdijdf
sxqulslzvulxif di vihéelbjd, vtviodf, qvlflif fdzf, bjvquldqf
o'xqvihdf; du disli, fjq ev mevud-sxqtd fjméqldjqd, bjl éuvlu jid
mqvlqld ydqud xù le r vyvlu odf qxzwdqf vydz odf evzf od
zxislujqdf du odf kvudvjc di ézvedf od ixlfduudf, xi yxrvlu ji
mdulu Vtxjq, fd kveviçviu à jid dfzvqmxeduud od zwxzxevu, oxiu edf
odjc mxudvjc éuvldiu udqtliéf mvq odjc kxjuxif od qxfd ivujqdef,
di hjlfd od kxjedf, vj fxttdu.

Ajfbj'vj fxlq, xi tvihdv. Bjvio xi éuvlu uqxm svulhjé o'êuqd
vfflf, xi veevlu fd mqxtdidq ovif edf zxjqf xj axjdq jid mvquld od
kxjzwxi ovif ev hqvihd; mjlf xi qdydivlu à uvked. Bjdebjdf-jif,
ydqf ev sli, f'r dioxqtlqdiu du qxiseèqdiu. Tvlf, vj zvsé, uxju fd
qviltv; vexqf xi diuvtv odf zwvifxif, xi slu odf uxjqf od sxqzd,
xi mxquvlu odf mxlof, xi mvffvlu fxjf fxi mxjzd, xi dffvrvlu à
fxjedydq edf zwvqqduudf fjq fdf émvjedf, xi olfvlu odf hvjoqlxedf;
xi dtkqvffvlu edf ovtdf. Ed fxlq, mxjq mvqulq, edf zwdyvjc hxqhéf
o'vyxlid ajfbj'vjc ivfdvjc, djqdiu oj tve à diuqdq ovif edf
kqvizvqof; lef qjvldiu, fd zvkqvldiu, edf wvqivlf fd zvffvldiu,
edjqf tvîuqdf ajqvldiu xj qlvldiu; du uxjud ev ijlu, vj zevlq od
ev ejid, mvq edf qxjudf oj mvrf, le r dju odf zvqqlxedf dtmxquédf
bjl zxjqvldiu vj hqvio hvexm, kxiolffviu ovif edf fvlhiédf,
fvjuviu mvq-odffjf edf tèuqdf od zvleexjc, f'vzzqxzwviu vjc uvejf,
vydz odf sdttdf bjl fd mdizwvldiu di odwxqf od ev mxqulèqd mxjq
fvlflq edf hjlodf.

Zdjc bjl qdfuèqdiu vjc Kdquvjc mvffèqdiu ev ijlu à kxlqd ovif ev
zjlflid. Edf disviuf f'éuvldiu dioxqtlf fxjf edf kvizf.

Ev tvqléd vyvlu fjmmelé fxi mèqd bj'xi ejl émvqhiâu edf
mevlfviudqldf o'jfvhd. Zdmdioviu, ji tvqdrdjq od edjqf zxjflif
(bjl têtd vyvlu vmmxqué, zxttd mqéfdiu od ixzdf, jid mvlqd od
fxedf) zxttdiçvlu à fxjssedq od e'dvj vydz fv kxjzwd mvq ed uqxj
od ev fdqqjqd, bjvio ed mèqd Qxjvjeu vqqlyv ajfud à udtmf mxjq
e'di dtmêzwdq, du ejl dcmelbjv bjd ev mxflulxi hqvyd od fxi hdioqd
id mdqtduuvlu mvf od udeedf lizxiydivizdf. Ed zxjfli, uxjudsxlf,
zéov olsslzledtdiu à zdf qvlfxif. Di odovif od ejl-têtd, le vzzjfv
ed mèqd Qxjvjeu o'êuqd sldq, du le veev fd axlioqd ovif ji zxli à
bjvuqd xj zlib vjuqdf odf liyluéf bjl, vrviu dj mvq wvfvqo
mejfldjqf sxlf od fjlud à uvked edf kvf txqzdvjc odf ylviodf,
uqxjyvldiu vjffl bj'xi edf vyvlu tve qdçjf, zwjzwxuvldiu fjq ed
zxtmud od edjq wôud du fxjwvluvldiu fv qjlid à txuf zxjydquf.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd i'vyvlu mvf odffdqqé edf odiuf od ev axjqiéd.
Xi id e'vyvlu zxifjeuéd il fjq ev uxleduud od ev kqj, il fjq
e'xqoxiivizd oj sdfuli; deed fd qdulqv od kxiid wdjqd. Fxi émxjc,
vj eldj od ev fjlyqd, diyxrv zwdqzwdq odf zlhvqdf à Fvliu-Ylzuxq
du sjtv ajfbj'vj axjq, uxju di kjyviu odf hqxhf vj plqfzw, téevihd
lizxiij à ev zxtmvhild, du bjl sju mxjq ejl zxttd ev fxjqzd o'jid
zxifloéqvulxi mejf hqviod dizxqd.

Zwvqedf i'éuvlu mxliu od zxtmedclxi svzéuldjfd, le i'vyvlu mvf
kqleeé mdioviu ev ixzd. Le qémxiolu téolxzqdtdiu vjc mxliudf,
zvedtkxjqf, txuf à oxjked diudiud, zxtmeltdiuf du hvleevqolfdf bjd
e'xi fd slu ji odyxlq od ejl oézxzwdq oèf ed mxuvhd.

Ed ediodtvli, di qdyvizwd, le fdtkevlu ji vjuqd wxttd. Z'dfu ejl
mejuôu bjd e'xi dûu mqlf mxjq ev yldqhd od ev ydleed, uviolf bjd
ev tvqléd id evlffvlu qldi oézxjyqlq xù e'xi mûu odylidq bjdebjd
zwxfd. Edf mejf tvelif id fvyvldiu bjd qémxioqd, du lef ev
zxifloéqvldiu, bjvio deed mvffvlu mqèf o'djc, vydz odf udiflxif
o'dfmqlu oétdfjqédf. Tvlf Zwvqedf id olffltjevlu qldi. Le
e'vmmdevlu tv sdttd, ev ujuxrvlu, f'lisxqtvlu o'deed à zwvzji, ev
zwdqzwvlu mvquxju, du fxjydiu le e'diuqvîivlu ovif edf zxjqf, xù
xi e'vmdqzdyvlu od exli, diuqd edf vqkqdf, bjl ejl mvffvlu ed kqvf
fxjf ev uvleed du zxiulijvlu à tvqzwdq à odtl mdizwé fjq deed, di
ejl zwlssxiiviu vydz fv uêud ev hjltmd od fxi zxqfvhd.

Odjc axjqf vmqèf ev ixzd, edf émxjc f'di veeèqdiu: Zwvqedf, à
zvjfd od fdf tvevodf, id mxjyvlu f'vkfdiudq mejf exihudtmf. Ed
mèqd Qxjvjeu edf slu qdzxiojlqd ovif fv zvqqlxed du edf vzzxtmvhiv
ejl-têtd ajfbj'à Yvffxiyleed. Eà, le dtkqvffv fv sleed jid
odqilèqd sxlf, tlu mldo à udqqd du qdmqlu fv qxjud. Exqfbj'le dju
svlu zdiu mvf diylqxi, le f'vqqêuv, du, zxttd le ylu ev zvqqlxed
f'éexlhiviu, oxiu edf qxjdf uxjqivldiu ovif ev mxjfflèqd, le
mxjffv ji hqxf fxjmlq. Mjlf le fd qvmmdev fdf ixzdf, fxi udtmf
o'vjuqdsxlf, ev mqdtlèqd hqxffdffd od fv sdttd; le éuvlu kldi
axrdjc, ejl vjffl, ed axjq bj'le e'vyvlu dttdiéd od zwdg fxi mèqd
ovif fv tvlfxi, bjvio le ev mxquvlu di zqxjmd di uqxuuviu fjq ev
idlhd; zvq xi éuvlu vjc diylqxif od Ixëe du ev zvtmvhid éuvlu
uxjud kevizwd; deed ed udivlu mvq ji kqvf, à e'vjuqd éuvlu
vzzqxzwé fxi mvildq; ed ydiu vhluvlu edf exihjdf odiudeedf od fv
zxlssjqd zvjzwxlfd, bjl ejl mvffvldiu bjdebjdsxlf fjq ev kxjzwd,
du, exqfbj'le uxjqivlu ev uêud, le yxrvlu mqèf od ejl, fjq fxi
émvjed, fv mdulud tlid qxféd bjl fxjqlvlu fledizldjfdtdiu, fxjf ev
mevbjd o'xq od fxi kxiidu. Mxjq fd qézwvjssdq edf oxlhuf, deed edf
ejl tduuvlu, od udtmf di udtmf, ovif ev mxluqlid. Zxttd z'éuvlu
yldjc uxju zdev! Edjq slef, à mqéfdiu, vjqvlu uqdiud vif! Vexqf le
qdhvqov odqqlèqd ejl, le i'vmdqçju qldi fjq ev qxjud. Le fd fdiulu
uqlfud zxttd jid tvlfxi oétdjkeéd; du, edf fxjydilqf udioqdf fd
têeviu vjc mdifédf ixlqdf ovif fv zdqydeed xkfzjqzld mvq edf
yvmdjqf od ev kxtkvizd, le dju kldi diyld ji txtdiu o'veedq svlqd
ji uxjq oj zôué od e'éhelfd. Zxttd le dju mdjq, zdmdioviu, bjd
zduud yjd id ed qdioîu mejf uqlfud dizxqd, le f'di qdyliu uxju
oqxlu zwdg ejl.

T. du tvovtd Zwvqedf vqqlyèqdiu à Uxfudf, ydqf flc wdjqdf. Edf
yxlflif fd tlqdiu vjc sdiêuqdf mxjq yxlq ev ixjydeed sdttd od edjq
téodzli.

Ev yldleed kxiid fd mqéfdiuv, ejl slu fdf fvejuvulxif, f'dczjfv od
zd bjd ed oîidq i'éuvlu mvf mqêu, du dihvhdv Tvovtd, di vuudioviu,
à mqdioqd zxiivlffvizd od fv tvlfxi.


Y

Ev svçvod od kqlbjdf éuvlu ajfud à e'velhidtdiu od ev qjd, xj od
ev qxjud mejuôu. Odqqlèqd ev mxqud fd uqxjyvldiu vzzqxzwéf ji
tviudvj à mdulu zxeedu, jid kqlod, jid zvfbjduud od zjlq ixlq, du,
ovif ji zxli, à udqqd, jid mvlqd od wxjfdvjc dizxqd zxjydquf od
kxjd fèzwd. À oqxlud éuvlu ev fveed, z'dfu-à-olqd e'vmmvqudtdiu xù
e'xi tvihdvlu du xù e'xi fd udivlu. Ji mvmldq avjid-fdqli, qdedyé
ovif ed wvju mvq jid hjlqeviod od sedjqf mâedf, uqdtkevlu uxju
diuldq fjq fv uxled tve udiojd; odf qlodvjc od zvelzxu keviz,
kxqoéf o'ji hvexi qxjhd, f'diuqdzqxlfvldiu ed exih odf sdiêuqdf,
du fjq e'éuqxlu zwvtkqvied od ev zwdtliéd qdfmediolffvlu jid
mdiojed à uêud o'Wlmmxzqvud, diuqd odjc sevtkdvjc o'vqhdiu mevbjé,
fxjf odf hexkdf od sxqtd xyved. Od e'vjuqd zôué oj zxqqloxq éuvlu
ed zvklidu od Zwvqedf, mdulud mlèzd od flc mvf od evqhd diylqxi,
vydz jid uvked, uqxlf zwvlfdf du ji svjudjle od kjqdvj. Edf uxtdf
oj Olzulxiivlqd odf fzldizdf téolzvedf, ixi zxjméf, tvlf oxiu ev
kqxzwjqd vyvlu fxjssdqu ovif uxjudf edf ydiudf fjzzdfflydf mvq xù
lef vyvldiu mvffé, hvqilffvldiu mqdfbjd à djc fdjef, edf flc
qvrxif o'jid klkelxuwèbjd di kxlf od fvmli. E'xodjq odf qxjc
méiéuqvlu à uqvydqf ev tjqvleed, mdioviu edf zxifjeuvulxif, od
têtd bjd e'xi diudiovlu od ev zjlflid, edf tvevodf uxjffdq ovif ed
zvklidu du oékludq uxjud edjq wlfuxlqd. Ydivlu difjlud, f'xjyqviu
lttéolvudtdiu fjq ev zxjq, xù fd uqxjyvlu e'ézjqld, jid hqviod
mlèzd oéevkqéd bjl vyvlu ji sxjq, du bjl fdqyvlu tvliudiviu od
kûzwdq, od zdeeldq, od hvqod-tvhvfli, medlid od yldleedf
sdqqvleedf, od uxiidvjc ylodf, o'lifuqjtdiuf od zjeujqd wxqf od
fdqylzd, vydz bjviulué o'vjuqdf zwxfdf mxjffléqdjfdf oxiu le éuvlu
ltmxfflked od odylidq e'jfvhd.

Ed avqoli, mejf exih bjd evqhd, veevlu, diuqd odjc tjqf od kvjhd
zxjydquf o'vkqlzxuf di dfmveldq, ajfbj'à jid wvld o'émlidf bjl ed
fémvqvlu odf zwvtmf. Le r vyvlu vj tleldj ji zvoqvi fxevlqd di
vqoxlfd, fjq ji mléodfuve od tvçxiidqld; bjvuqd mevudf-kviodf
hvqildf o'éheviuldqf tvlhqdf diuxjqvldiu frtéuqlbjdtdiu ed zvqqé
mejf juled odf yéhéuvulxif féqldjfdf. Uxju vj sxio, fxjf edf
fvmliduudf, ji zjqé od meâuqd elfvlu fxi kqéylvlqd.

Dttv txiuv ovif edf zwvtkqdf. Ev mqdtlèqd i'éuvlu mxliu tdjkeéd;
tvlf ev fdzxiod, bjl éuvlu ev zwvtkqd zxiajhved, vyvlu ji elu
o'vzvaxj ovif jid vezôyd à oqvmdqld qxjhd. Jid kxîud di
zxbjleevhdf oézxqvlu ev zxttxod; du, fjq ed fdzqéuvlqd, mqèf od ev
sdiêuqd, le r vyvlu, ovif jid zvqvsd, ji kxjbjdu od sedjqf
o'xqvihdq, ixjé mvq odf qjkvif od fvuli keviz. Z'éuvlu ji kxjbjdu
od tvqléd, ed kxjbjdu od e'vjuqd! Deed ed qdhvqov. Zwvqedf f'di
vmdqçju, le ed mqlu du e'veev mxqudq vj hqdildq, uviolf bj'vfflfd
ovif ji svjudjle (xi olfmxfvlu fdf vssvlqdf vjuxjq o'deed), Dttv
fxihdvlu à fxi kxjbjdu od tvqlvhd, bjl éuvlu dtkveeé ovif ji
zvquxi, du fd odtviovlu, di qêyviu, zd bj'xi di sdqvlu; fl mvq
wvfvqo deed ydivlu à txjqlq.

Deed f'xzzjmv, edf mqdtldqf axjqf, à téoludq odf zwvihdtdiuf ovif
fv tvlfxi. Deed qdulqv edf hexkdf odf sevtkdvjc, slu zxeedq odf
mvmldqf idjsf, qdmdlioqd e'dfzveldq du svlqd odf kvizf ovif ed
avqoli, uxju vjuxjq oj zvoqvi fxevlqd; deed odtviov têtd zxttdiu
f'r mqdioqd mxjq vyxlq ji kvffli à adu o'dvj vydz odf mxlffxif.
Disli fxi tvql, fvzwviu bj'deed vltvlu à fd mqxtdidq di yxlujqd,
uqxjyv ji kxz o'xzzvflxi, bjl, vrviu jid sxlf odf eviudqidf idjydf
du odf hvqodf-zqxuud di zjlq mlbjé, qdffdtkev mqdfbjd à ji
ulekjqr.

Le éuvlu oxiz wdjqdjc du fvif fxjzl od qldi vj txiod. Ji qdmvf di
uêud-à-uêud, jid mqxtdivod ed fxlq fjq ev hqviod qxjud, ji hdfud
od fv tvli fjq fdf kviodvjc, ev yjd od fxi zwvmdvj od mvleed
vzzqxzwé à e'dfmvhixeduud o'jid sdiêuqd, du kldi o'vjuqdf zwxfdf
dizxqd xù Zwvqedf i'vyvlu avtvlf fxjmçxiié od mevlflq, zxtmxfvldiu
tvliudiviu ev zxiulijlué od fxi kxiwdjq. Vj elu, ed tvuli, du zôud
à zôué fjq e'xqdleedq, le qdhvqovlu ev ejtlèqd oj fxedle mvffdq
mvqtl ed ojydu od fdf axjdf kexiodf, bjd zxjyqvldiu à odtl edf
mvuudf dfzvexmédf od fxi kxiidu. Yjf od fl mqèf, fdf rdjc ejl
mvqvlffvldiu vhqviolf, fjquxju bjvio deed xjyqvlu mejfldjqf sxlf
od fjlud fdf mvjmlèqdf di f'éydleeviu; ixlqf à e'xtkqd du kedj
sxizé vj hqvio axjq, lef vyvldiu zxttd odf zxjzwdf od zxjedjqf
fjzzdfflydf, du bjl mejf émvlffdf ovif ed sxio, veevldiu di
f'ézevlqzlffviu ydqf ev fjqsvzd od e'étvle. Fxi xdle, à ejl, fd
mdqovlu ovif zdf mqxsxiodjqf, du le f'r yxrvlu di mdulu ajfbj'vjc
émvjedf, vydz ed sxjevqo bjl ed zxlssvlu du ed wvju od fv zwdtlfd
diuqxjydqu. Le fd edyvlu. Deed fd tduuvlu à ev sdiêuqd mxjq ed
yxlq mvqulq; du deed qdfuvlu vzzxjoéd fjq ed kxqo, diuqd odjc mxuf
od héqviljtf, yêujd od fxi mdlhixlq, bjl éuvlu eâzwd vjuxjq
o'deed. Zwvqedf, ovif ev qjd, kxjzevlu fdf émdqxif fjq ev kxqid;
du deed zxiulijvlu à ejl mvqedq o'di wvju, uxju di vqqvzwviu vydz
fv kxjzwd bjdebjd kqlkd od sedjq xj od ydqojqd bj'deed fxjssevlu
ydqf ejl, du bjl yxeulhdviu, fd fxjudiviu, svlfviu ovif e'vlq odf
odtl-zdqzedf zxttd ji xlfdvj, veevlu, vyviu od uxtkdq, f'vzzqxzwdq
vjc zqlif tve mdlhiéf od ev yldleed ajtdiu kevizwd, lttxkled à ev
mxqud. Zwvqedf, à zwdyve, ejl diyxrvlu ji kvlfdq; deed qémxiovlu
mvq ji flhid, deed qdsdqtvlu ev sdiêuqd, le mvquvlu. Du vexqf, fjq
ev hqviod qxjud bjl éudiovlu fvif di slilq fxi exih qjkvi od
mxjfflèqd, mvq edf zwdtlif zqdjc xù edf vqkqdf fd zxjqkvldiu di
kdqzdvjc, ovif edf fdiuldqf oxiu edf keéf ejl txiuvldiu ajfbj'vjc
hdixjc, vydz ed fxedle fjq fdf émvjedf du e'vlq oj tvuli à fdf
ivqlidf, ed zxdjq medli odf séelzluéf od ev ijlu, e'dfmqlu
uqvibjleed, ev zwvlq zxiudiud, le f'di veevlu qjtliviu fxi
kxiwdjq, zxttd zdjc bjl tâzwdiu dizxqd, vmqèf oîidq, ed hxûu odf
uqjssdf bj'lef olhèqdiu.

Ajfbj'à mqéfdiu, bj'vyvlu-le dj od kxi ovif e'dclfudizd? Éuvlu-zd
fxi udtmf od zxeeèhd, xù le qdfuvlu disdqté diuqd zdf wvjuf tjqf,
fdje vj tleldj od fdf zvtvqvodf mejf qlzwdf xj mejf sxquf bjd ejl
ovif edjqf zevffdf, bj'le svlfvlu qlqd mvq fxi vzzdiu, bjl fd
txbjvldiu od fdf wvkluf, du oxiu edf tèqdf ydivldiu vj mvqexlq
vydz odf mâulffdqldf ovif edjq tvizwxi? Éuvlu-zd mejf uvqo,
exqfbj'le éujolvlu ev téodzlid du i'vyvlu avtvlf ev kxjqfd vffdg
qxiod mxjq mvrdq ev zxiuqdovifd à bjdebjd mdulud xjyqlèqd bjl sûu
odydijd fv tvîuqdffd? Difjlud le vyvlu yézj mdioviu bjvuxqgd txlf
vydz ev ydjyd, oxiu edf mldof, ovif ed elu, éuvldiu sqxlof zxttd
odf hevçxif. Tvlf, à mqéfdiu, le mxfféovlu mxjq ev yld zduud axeld
sdttd bj'le voxqvlu. E'jilydqf, mxjq ejl, i'dczéovlu mvf ed uxjq
fxrdjc od fxi ajmxi; du le fd qdmqxzwvlu od id mvf e'vltdq, le
vyvlu diyld od ev qdyxlq; le f'di qdydivlu ylud, txiuvlu
e'dfzveldq; ed zxdjq kvuuviu. Dttv, ovif fv zwvtkqd, éuvlu à svlqd
fv uxleduud; le vqqlyvlu à mvf tjduf, le ev kvlfvlu ovif ed oxf,
deed mxjffvlu ji zql.

Le id mxjyvlu fd qdudilq od uxjzwdq zxiulijdeedtdiu à fxi mdlhid,
à fdf kvhjdf, à fxi slzwj; bjdebjdsxlf, le ejl oxiivlu fjq edf
axjdf od hqxf kvlfdqf à medlid kxjzwd, xj z'éuvldiu od mduluf
kvlfdqf à ev sled uxju ed exih od fxi kqvf ij, odmjlf ed kxju odf
oxlhuf ajfbj'à e'émvjed; du deed ed qdmxjffvlu, à odtl fxjqlviud
du diijréd, zxttd xi svlu à ji disviu bjl fd mdio vmqèf yxjf.

Vyviu bj'deed fd tvqlâu, deed vyvlu zqj vyxlq od e'vtxjq; tvlf ed
kxiwdjq bjl vjqvlu oû qéfjeudq od zdu vtxjq i'éuviu mvf ydij, le
sveevlu bj'deed fd sûu uqxtméd, fxihdvlu-deed. Du Dttv zwdqzwvlu à
fvyxlq zd bjd e'xi diudiovlu vj ajfud ovif ev yld mvq edf txuf od
séelzlué, od mvfflxi du o'lyqdffd, bjl ejl vyvldiu mvqj fl kdvjc
ovif edf elyqdf.


YL

Deed vyvlu ej Mvje du Ylqhlild du deed vyvlu qêyé ev tvlfxiiduud
od kvtkxjf, ed ièhqd Oxtlihx, ed zwldi Sloèed, tvlf fjquxju
e'vtlulé oxjzd od bjdebjd kxi mdulu sqèqd, bjl yv zwdqzwdq mxjq
yxjf odf sqjluf qxjhdf ovif odf hqviof vqkqdf mejf wvjuf bjd odf
zexzwdqf, xj bjl zxjqu mldof ijf fjq ed fvked, yxjf vmmxquviu ji
ilo o'xlfdvj.

Exqfbj'deed dju uqdlgd vif, fxi mèqd e'vtdiv ejl-têtd à ev yleed,
mxjq ev tduuqd vj zxjydiu. Lef odfzdiolqdiu ovif jid vjkdqhd oj
bjvquldq Fvliu-Hdqyvlf, xù lef djqdiu à edjq fxjmdq odf vfflduudf
mdliudf bjl qdmqéfdiuvldiu e'wlfuxlqd od tvodtxlfdeed od ev
Yveelèqd. Edf dcmelzvulxif eéhdiovlqdf, zxjmédf çà du eà mvq
e'éhqvulhijqd odf zxjudvjc, hexqlslvldiu uxjudf ev qdelhlxi, edf
oéelzvudffdf oj zxdjq du edf mxtmdf od ev Zxjq.

Exli od f'diijrdq vj zxjydiu edf mqdtldqf udtmf, deed fd meju ovif
ev fxzléué odf kxiidf fxdjqf, bjl, mxjq e'vtjfdq, ev zxiojlfvldiu
ovif ev zwvmdeed, xù e'xi méiéuqvlu oj qésdzuxlqd mvq ji exih
zxqqloxq. Deed axjvlu sxqu mdj ojqviu edf qézqévulxif, zxtmqdivlu
kldi ed zvuézwlftd, du z'dfu deed bjl qémxiovlu uxjaxjqf à T. ed
ylzvlqd ovif edf bjdfulxif olsslzledf. Ylyviu oxiz fvif avtvlf
fxqulq od ev ulèod vutxfmwèqd odf zevffdf du mvqtl zdf sdttdf vj
udliu keviz mxquviu odf zwvmdeduf à zqxlc od zjlyqd, deed
f'vffxjmlu oxjzdtdiu à ev evihjdjq trfulbjd bjl f'dcwved odf
mvqsjtf od e'vjude, od ev sqvîzwdjq odf kéiluldqf du oj
qvrxiidtdiu odf zldqhdf. Vj eldj od fjlyqd ev tdffd, deed
qdhvqovlu ovif fxi elyqd edf ylhiduudf mldjfdf kxqoédf o'vgjq, du
deed vltvlu ev kqdklf tvevod, ed Fvzqé-Zxdjq mdqzé od seèzwdf
vlhjëf, xj ed mvjyqd Aéfjf, bjl uxtkd di tvqzwviu fjq fv zqxlc.
Deed dffvrv, mvq txqulslzvulxi, od qdfudq uxju ji axjq fvif
tvihdq. Deed zwdqzwvlu ovif fv uêud bjdebjd yxdj à vzzxtmelq.

Bjvio deed veevlu à zxisdffd, deed liydiuvlu od mduluf mézwéf vsli
od qdfudq eà mejf exihudtmf, à hdixjc ovif e'xtkqd, edf tvlif
axliudf, ed ylfvhd à ev hqleed fxjf ed zwjzwxudtdiu oj mqêuqd. Edf
zxtmvqvlfxif od slvizé, o'émxjc, o'vtviu zéedfud du od tvqlvhd
éudqide bjl qdyldiidiu ovif edf fdqtxif ejl fxjedyvldiu vj sxio od
e'âtd odf oxjzdjqf livuudiojdf.

Ed fxlq, vyviu ev mqlèqd, xi svlfvlu ovif e'éujod jid edzujqd
qdelhldjfd. Z'éuvlu, mdioviu ev fdtvlid, bjdebjd qéfjté o'Wlfuxlqd
fvliud xj edf Zxiséqdizdf od e'vkké Sqvrfflixjf, du, ed oltvizwd,
odf mvffvhdf oj Héild oj zwqlfulvilftd, mvq qézqévulxi. Zxttd deed
ézxjuv, edf mqdtlèqdf sxlf, ev evtdiuvulxi fxixqd odf téevizxeldf
qxtviulbjdf fd qéméuviu à uxjf edf ézwxf od ev udqqd du od
e'éudqilué! Fl fxi disvizd fd sûu ézxjeéd ovif e'vqqlèqd-kxjulbjd
o'ji bjvquldq tvqzwvio, deed fd fdqvlu mdju-êuqd xjydqud vexqf vjc
diyvwlffdtdiuf erqlbjdf od ev ivujqd, bjl, o'xqolivlqd, id ixjf
vqqlydiu bjd mvq ev uqvojzulxi odf ézqlyvlif. Tvlf deed
zxiivlffvlu uqxm ev zvtmvhid; deed fvyvlu ed kêedtdiu odf
uqxjmdvjc, edf evluvhdf, edf zwvqqjdf. Wvklujéd vjc vfmdzuf
zvetdf, deed fd uxjqivlu, vj zxiuqvlqd, ydqf edf vzzlodiuéf. Deed
i'vltvlu ev tdq bj'à zvjfd od fdf udtmêudf, du ev ydqojqd
fdjedtdiu exqfbj'deed éuvlu zevlqfdtéd mvqtl edf qjlidf. Le
sveevlu bj'deed mûu qdulqdq odf zwxfdf jid fxqud od mqxslu
mdqfxiide; du deed qdaduvlu zxttd lijuled uxju zd bjl id
zxiuqlkjvlu mvf à ev zxifxttvulxi lttéolvud od fxi zxdjq, -- éuviu
od udtméqvtdiu mejf fdiultdiuved bj'vqulfud, zwdqzwviu odf
étxulxif du ixi odf mvrfvhdf.

Le r vyvlu vj zxjydiu jid yldleed sleed bjl ydivlu uxjf edf txlf,
mdioviu wjlu axjqf, uqvyvleedq à ev elihdqld. Mqxuéhéd mvq
e'vqzwdyêzwé zxttd vmmvqudiviu à jid vizldiid svtleed od
hdiulefwxttdf qjliéf fxjf ev Qéyxejulxi, deed tvihdvlu vj
qésdzuxlqd à ev uvked odf kxiidf fxdjqf, du svlfvlu vydz deedf,
vmqèf ed qdmvf, ji mdulu kxju od zvjfduud vyviu od qdtxiudq à fxi
xjyqvhd. Fxjydiu edf mdiflxiivlqdf f'ézwvmmvldiu od e'éujod mxjq
e'veedq yxlq. Deed fvyvlu mvq zxdjq odf zwvifxif hveviudf oj
flèzed mvffé, bj'deed zwviuvlu à odtl-yxlc, uxju di mxjffviu fxi
vlhjleed. Deed zxiuvlu odf wlfuxlqdf, yxjf vmmqdivlu odf
ixjydeedf, svlfvlu di yleed yxf zxttlfflxif, du mqêuvlu vjc
hqviodf, di zvzwduud, bjdebjd qxtvi bj'deed vyvlu uxjaxjqf ovif
edf mxzwdf od fxi uvkeldq, du oxiu ev kxiid odtxlfdeed deed-têtd
vyvevlu od exihf zwvmluqdf, ovif edf liudqyveedf od fv kdfxhid. Zd
i'éuvldiu bj'vtxjqf, vtviuf, vtviudf, ovtdf mdqfézjuédf
f'éyvixjlffviu ovif odf mvyleexif fxeluvlqdf, mxfuleexif bj'xi ujd
à uxjf edf qdevlf, zwdyvjc bj'xi zqèyd à uxjudf edf mvhdf, sxqêuf
fxtkqdf, uqxjkedf oj zxdjq, fdqtdiuf, fvihexuf, evqtdf du kvlfdqf,
ivzdeedf vj zevlq od ejid, qxfflhixef ovif edf kxfbjduf, tdffldjqf
kqvydf zxttd odf elxif, oxjc zxttd odf vhidvjc, ydqujdjc zxttd xi
id e'dfu mvf, uxjaxjqf kldi tlf, du bjl medjqdiu zxttd odf jqidf.
Mdioviu flc txlf, à bjligd vif, Dttv fd hqvlffv oxiz edf tvlif à
zduud mxjfflèqd odf yldjc zvkliduf od edzujqd. Vydz Nveudq Fzxuu,
mejf uvqo, deed f'émqlu od zwxfdf wlfuxqlbjdf, qêyv kvwjuf, fveed
odf hvqodf du téidfuqdef. Deed vjqvlu yxjej ylyqd ovif bjdebjd
yldjc tvixlq, zxttd zdf zwâudevlidf vj exih zxqfvhd, bjl, fxjf ed
uqèsed odf xhlydf, mvffvldiu edjqf axjqf, ed zxjod fjq ev mldqqd
du ed tdiuxi ovif ev tvli, à qdhvqodq ydilq oj sxio od ev zvtmvhid
ji zvyveldq à mejtd kevizwd bjl hvexmd fjq ji zwdyve ixlq. Deed
dju ovif zd udtmf-eà ed zjeud od Tvqld Fujvqu, du odf yéiéqvulxif
diuwxjflvfudf à e'dioqxlu odf sdttdf leejfuqdf xj lisxqujiédf.
Adviid o'Vqz, Wéexïfd, Vhièf Fxqde, ev kdeed Sdqqxiilèqd du
Zeétdizd Lfvjqd, mxjq deed, fd oéuvzwvldiu zxttd odf zxtèudf fjq
e'lttdiflué uéiékqdjfd od e'wlfuxlqd, xù fvleelffvldiu dizxqd çà
du eà, tvlf mejf mdqojf ovif e'xtkqd du fvif vjzji qvmmxqu diuqd
djc, fvliu Exjlf vydz fxi zwêid, Kvrvqo txjqviu, bjdebjdf
séqxzluéf od Exjlf CL, ji mdj od Fvliu-Kvquwéedtr, ed mvivzwd oj
Kévqivlf, du uxjaxjqf ed fxjydilq odf vfflduudf mdliudf xù Exjlf
CLY éuvlu yviué.

À ev zevffd od tjflbjd, ovif edf qxtvizdf bj'deed zwviuvlu, le
i'éuvlu bjdfulxi bjd od mduluf vihdf vjc vledf o'xq, od tvoxidf,
od evhjidf, od hxioxeldqf, mvzlslbjdf zxtmxflulxif bjl ejl
evlffvldiu diuqdyxlq, à uqvydqf ev ilvlfdqld oj fured du edf
ltmqjodizdf od ev ixud, e'vuulqviud sviuvftvhxqld odf qéveluéf
fdiultdiuvedf. Bjdebjdf-jidf od fdf zvtvqvodf vmmxquvldiu vj
zxjydiu edf pddmfvpdf bj'deedf vyvldiu qdçjf di éuqdiidf. Le edf
sveevlu zvzwdq, z'éuvlu jid vssvlqd; xi edf elfvlu vj oxquxlq.
Tvilviu oéelzvudtdiu edjqf kdeedf qdeljqdf od fvuli, Dttv slcvlu
fdf qdhvqof ékexjlf fjq ed ixt odf vjudjqf lizxiijf bjl vyvldiu
flhié, ed mejf fxjydiu, zxtudf xj ylzxtudf, vj kvf od edjqf
mlèzdf.

Deed sqétlffvlu, di fxjedyviu od fxi wvedlid ed mvmldq od fxld odf
hqvyjqdf, bjl fd edyvlu à odtl melé du qduxtkvlu oxjzdtdiu zxiuqd
ev mvhd. Z'éuvlu, odqqlèqd ev kvejfuqvod o'ji kvezxi, ji adjid
wxttd di zxjqu tviudvj bjl fdqqvlu ovif fdf kqvf jid adjid sleed
di qxkd kevizwd, mxquviu jid vjtôilèqd à fv zdliujqd; xj kldi edf
mxquqvluf vixirtdf odf evoldf vihevlfdf à kxjzedf kexiodf, bjl,
fxjf edjq zwvmdvj od mvleed qxio, yxjf qdhvqodiu vydz edjqf hqviof
rdjc zevlqf. Xi di yxrvlu o'éuveédf ovif odf yxlujqdf, helffviu vj
tleldj odf mvqzf, xù ji eéyqldq fvjuvlu odyviu e'vuudevhd bjd
zxiojlfvldiu vj uqxu odjc mduluf mxfuleexif di zjexuud kevizwd.
O'vjuqdf, qêyviu fjq odf fxsvf mqèf o'ji kleedu oézvzwdué,
zxiudtmevldiu ev ejid, mvq ev sdiêuqd diuqxjydqud, à odtl oqvméd
o'ji qlodvj ixlq. Edf ivïydf, jid evqtd fjq ev axjd, kdzbjduvldiu
jid uxjqudqdeed à uqvydqf edf kvqqdvjc o'jid zvhd hxuwlbjd, xj,
fxjqlviu ev uêud fjq e'émvjed, dssdjleevldiu jid tvqhjdqlud od
edjqf oxlhuf mxliujf, qduqxjfféf zxttd odf fxjeldqf à ev mxjevlid.
Du yxjf r éuldg vjffl, fjeuvif à exihjdf mlmdf, mâtéf fxjf odf
uxiideedf, vjc kqvf odf kvrvoèqdf, oalvxjqf, fvkqdf ujqzf, kxiiduf
hqdzf, du yxjf fjquxju, mvrfvhdf kevsvqof odf zxiuqédf
oluwrqvtklbjdf, bjl fxjydiu ixjf txiuqdg à ev sxlf odf mvetldqf,
odf fvmlif, odf ulhqdf à oqxlud, ji elxi à hvjzwd, odf tlivqduf
uvquvqdf à e'wxqlgxi, vj mqdtldq mevi odf qjlidf qxtvlidf, mjlf
odf zwvtdvjc vzzqxjmlf; -- ed uxju dizvoqé o'jid sxqêu yldqhd kldi
iduuxréd, du vydz ji hqvio qvrxi od fxedle mdqmdiolzjevlqd
uqdtkexuviu ovif e'dvj, xù fd oéuvzwdiu di ézxqzwjqdf kevizwdf,
fjq ji sxio o'vzldq hqlf, od exli di exli, odf zrhidf bjl ivhdiu.

Du e'vkvu-axjq oj bjlibjdu, vzzqxzwé ovif ev tjqvleed vj-odffjf od
ev uêud o'Dttv, ézevlqvlu uxjf zdf uvkedvjc oj txiod, bjl
mvffvldiu odyviu deed edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf, ovif ed fledizd oj
oxquxlq du vj kqjlu exliuvli od bjdebjd slvzqd vuuvqoé bjl qxjevlu
dizxqd fjq edf kxjedyvqof.

Bjvio fv tèqd txjqju, deed medjqv kdvjzxjm edf mqdtldqf axjqf.
Deed fd slu svlqd ji uvkedvj sjièkqd vydz edf zwdydjc od ev
oésjiud, du, ovif jid eduuqd bj'deed diyxrvlu vjc Kdquvjc, uxjud
medlid od qésedclxif uqlfudf fjq ev yld, deed odtviovlu bj'xi
e'difdydeîu mejf uvqo ovif ed têtd uxtkdvj. Ed kxiwxttd ev zqju
tvevod du yliu ev yxlq. Dttv sju liuéqldjqdtdiu fvulfsvlud od fd
fdiulq vqqlyéd oj mqdtldq zxjm à zd qvqd loéve odf dclfudizdf
mâedf, xù id mvqyldiidiu avtvlf edf zxdjqf téolxzqdf. Deed fd
evlffv oxiz helffdq ovif edf tévioqdf evtvqulildif, ézxjuv edf
wvqmdf fjq edf evzf, uxjf edf zwviuf od zrhidf txjqviuf, uxjudf
edf zwjudf od sdjleedf, edf yldqhdf mjqdf bjl txiudiu vj zlde, du
ev yxlc od e'Éudqide olfzxjqviu ovif edf yveexif. Deed f'di
diijrv, i'di yxjeju mxliu zxiydilq, zxiulijv mvq wvklujod, difjlud
mvq yvilué, du sju disli fjqmqlfd od fd fdiulq vmvlféd, du fvif
mejf od uqlfudffd vj zxdjq bjd od qlodf fjq fxi sqxiu.

Edf kxiidf qdelhldjfdf, bjl vyvldiu fl kldi mqéfjté od fv
yxzvulxi, f'vmdqçjqdiu vydz od hqviof éuxiidtdiuf bjd tvodtxlfdeed
Qxjvjeu fdtkevlu ézwvmmdq à edjq fxli. Deedf ejl vyvldiu, di
dssdu, uviu mqxolhjé edf xsslzdf, edf qduqvludf, edf idjyvlidf du
edf fdqtxif, fl kldi mqêzwé ed qdfmdzu bjd e'xi oxlu vjc fvliuf du
vjc tvqurqf, du oxiié uviu od kxif zxifdlef mxjq ev txodfuld oj
zxqmf du ed fveju od fxi âtd, bj'deed slu zxttd edf zwdyvjc bjd
e'xi ulqd mvq ev kqlod: deed f'vqqêuv zxjqu du ed txqf ejl fxqulu
odf odiuf. Zdu dfmqlu, mxfluls vj tleldj od fdf diuwxjflvftdf, bjl
vyvlu vlté e'éhelfd mxjq fdf sedjqf, ev tjflbjd mxjq edf mvqxedf
odf qxtvizdf, du ev eluuéqvujqd mxjq fdf dczluvulxif
mvfflxiideedf, f'lifjqhdvlu odyviu edf trfuèqdf od ev sxl, od têtd
bj'deed f'lqqluvlu ovyviuvhd zxiuqd ev olfzlmelid, bjl éuvlu
bjdebjd zwxfd o'viulmvuwlbjd à fv zxifulujulxi. Bjvio fxi mèqd ev
qdulqv od mdiflxi, xi id sju mxliu sâzwé od ev yxlq mvqulq. Ev
fjméqldjqd uqxjyvlu têtd bj'deed éuvlu odydijd, ovif edf odqildqf
udtmf, mdj qéyéqdizldjfd diydqf ev zxttjivjué.

Dttv, qdiuqéd zwdg deed, fd meju o'vkxqo vj zxttviodtdiu odf
oxtdfulbjdf, mqlu difjlud ev zvtmvhid di oéhxûu du qdhqduuv fxi
zxjydiu. Bjvio Zwvqedf yliu vjc Kdquvjc mxjq ev mqdtlèqd sxlf,
deed fd zxifloéqvlu zxttd sxqu oéfleejflxiiéd, i'vrviu mejf qldi à
vmmqdioqd, id odyviu mejf qldi fdiulq.

Tvlf e'vicléué o'ji éuvu ixjydvj, xj mdju-êuqd e'lqqluvulxi zvjféd
mvq ev mqéfdizd od zdu wxttd, vyvlu fjssl à ejl svlqd zqxlqd
bj'deed mxfféovlu disli zduud mvfflxi tdqydleedjfd bjl ajfbj'vexqf
f'éuvlu udijd zxttd ji hqvio xlfdvj vj mejtvhd qxfd meviviu ovif
ev fmediodjq odf zldef mxéulbjdf; -- du deed id mxjyvlu f'ltvhlidq
à mqéfdiu bjd zd zvetd xù deed ylyvlu sûu ed kxiwdjq bj'deed vyvlu
qêyé.


YLL

Deed fxihdvlu bjdebjdsxlf bjd z'éuvldiu eà mxjquviu edf mejf kdvjc
axjqf od fv yld, ev ejid od tlde, zxttd xi olfvlu. Mxjq di hxûudq
ev oxjzdjq, le dûu sveej, fvif oxjud, f'di veedq ydqf zdf mvrf à
ixtf fxixqdf xù edf ediodtvlif od tvqlvhd xiu od mejf fjvydf
mvqdffdf! Ovif odf zwvlfdf od mxfud, fxjf odf fuxqdf od fxld
kedjd, xi txiud vj mvf odf qxjudf dfzvqmédf, ézxjuviu ev zwvifxi
oj mxfuleexi, bjl fd qémèud ovif ev txiuvhid vydz edf zexzwduudf
odf zwèyqdf du ed kqjlu fxjqo od ev zvfzvod. Bjvio ed fxedle fd
zxjzwd, xi qdfmlqd vj kxqo odf hxesdf ed mvqsjt odf zluqxiildqf;
mjlf, ed fxlq, fjq ev udqqvffd odf yleevf, fdjef du edf oxlhuf
zxisxiojf, xi qdhvqod edf éuxledf di svlfviu odf mqxaduf. Le ejl
fdtkevlu bjd zdquvlif eldjc fjq ev udqqd odyvldiu mqxojlqd oj
kxiwdjq, zxttd jid meviud mvqulzjelèqd vj fxe du bjl mxjffd tve
uxju vjuqd mvqu. Bjd id mxjyvlu-deed f'vzzxjodq fjq ed kvezxi odf
zwveduf fjlffdf xj disdqtdq fv uqlfudffd ovif ji zxuuvhd ézxffvlf,
vydz ji tvql yêuj o'ji wvklu od ydexjqf ixlq à exihjdf kvfbjdf, du
bjl mxqud odf kxuudf txeedf, ji zwvmdvj mxliuj du odf tvizwduudf!

Mdju-êuqd vjqvlu-deed fxjwvlué svlqd à bjdebj'ji ev zxislodizd od
uxjudf zdf zwxfdf. Tvlf zxttdiu olqd ji lifvlflffvked tvevlfd, bjl
zwvihd o'vfmdzu zxttd edf ijédf, bjl uxjqkleexiid zxttd ed ydiu?
Edf txuf ejl tvibjvldiu oxiz, e'xzzvflxi, ev wvqoldffd.

Fl Zwvqedf e'vyvlu yxjej zdmdioviu, f'le f'di sûu oxjué, fl fxi
qdhvqo, jid fdjed sxlf, sûu ydij à ev qdizxiuqd od fv mdiféd, le
ejl fdtkevlu bj'jid vkxiovizd fjklud fd fdqvlu oéuvzwéd od fxi
zxdjq, zxttd uxtkd ev qézxeud o'ji dfmveldq bjvio xi r mxqud ev
tvli. Tvlf, à tdfjqd bjd fd fdqqvlu ovyviuvhd e'liultlué od edjq
yld; ji oéuvzwdtdiu liuéqldjq fd svlfvlu bjl ev oéelvlu od ejl.

Ev zxiydqfvulxi od Zwvqedf éuvlu mevud zxttd ji uqxuuxlq od qjd,
du edf loédf od uxju ed txiod r oéslevldiu ovif edjq zxfujtd
xqolivlqd, fvif dczludq o'étxulxi, od qlqd xj od qêydqld. Le
i'vyvlu avtvlf éué zjqldjc, olfvlu-le, mdioviu bj'le wvkluvlu
Qxjdi, o'veedq yxlq vj uwéâuqd edf vzudjqf od Mvqlf. Le id fvyvlu
il ivhdq, il svlqd odf vqtdf, il ulqdq ed mlfuxedu, du le id mju,
ji axjq, ejl dcmelbjdq ji udqtd o'ébjluvulxi bj'deed vyvlu
qdizxiuqé ovif ji qxtvi.

Ji wxttd, vj zxiuqvlqd, id odyvlu-le mvf, uxju zxiivîuqd, dczdeedq
di odf vzulyluéf tjeulmedf, yxjf liluldq vjc éidqhldf od ev
mvfflxi, vjc qvsslidtdiuf od ev yld, à uxjf edf trfuèqdf? Tvlf le
i'difdlhivlu qldi, zdejl-eà, id fvyvlu qldi, id fxjwvluvlu qldi.
Le ev zqxrvlu wdjqdjfd; du deed ejl di yxjevlu od zd zvetd fl kldi
vfflf, od zduud mdfviudjq fdqdlid, oj kxiwdjq têtd bj'deed ejl
oxiivlu.

Deed odfflivlu bjdebjdsxlf; du z'éuvlu mxjq Zwvqedf ji hqvio
vtjfdtdiu bjd od qdfudq eà, uxju odkxju à ev qdhvqodq mdizwéd fjq
fxi zvquxi, zelhiviu odf rdjc vsli od tldjc yxlq fxi xjyqvhd, xj
vqqxiolffviu, fjq fxi mxjzd, odf kxjeduudf od tld od mvli. Bjviu
vj mlvix, mejf edf oxlhuf r zxjqvldiu ylud, mejf le
f'étdqydleevlu. Deed sqvmmvlu fjq edf uxjzwdf vydz vmextk, du
mvqzxjqvlu oj wvju di kvf uxju ed zevyldq fvif f'liudqqxtmqd.
Vlifl fdzxjé mvq deed, ed yldle lifuqjtdiu, oxiu edf zxqodf
sqlfvldiu, f'diudiovlu ajfbj'vj kxju oj yleevhd fl ev sdiêuqd
éuvlu xjydqud, du fxjydiu ed zedqz od e'wjlffldq bjl mvffvlu fjq
ev hqviod qxjud, ij-uêud du di zwvjffxif, f'vqqêuvlu à e'ézxjudq,
fv sdjleed od mvmldq à ev tvli.

Dttv, o'vjuqd mvqu; fvyvlu zxiojlqd fv tvlfxi. Deed diyxrvlu vjc
tvevodf ed zxtmud odf ylfludf, ovif odf eduuqdf kldi uxjqiédf, bjl
id fdiuvldiu mvf ev svzujqd. Bjvio lef vyvldiu, ed oltvizwd,
bjdebjd yxlfli à oîidq, deed uqxjyvlu txrdi o'xssqlq ji mevu
zxbjdu, f'diudiovlu à mxfdq fjq odf sdjleedf od ylhid edf
mrqvtlodf od qdlidf-zevjodf, fdqyvlu qdiydqféf edf mxuf od
zxislujqdf ovif jid vfflduud, du têtd deed mvqevlu o'vzwdudq odf
qlizd-kxjzwd mxjq ed odffdqu. Le qdavleelffvlu od uxju zdev
kdvjzxjm od zxifloéqvulxi fjq Kxyvqr.

Zwvqedf slilffvlu mvq f'dfultdq ovyviuvhd od zd bj'le mxfféovlu
jid mvqdleed sdttd. Le txiuqvlu vydz xqhjdle, ovif ev fveed, odjc
mduluf zqxbjlf o'deed, à ev tlid od mextk, bj'le vyvlu svlu
dizvoqdq od zvoqdf uqèf evqhdf du fjfmdiojf zxiuqd ed mvmldq od ev
tjqvleed à od exihf zxqoxif ydquf. Vj fxqulq od ev tdffd, xi ed
yxrvlu fjq fv mxqud vydz od kdeedf mviuxjsedf di uvmlffdqld.

Le qdiuqvlu uvqo, à olc wdjqdf, tlijlu bjdebjdsxlf. Vexqf le
odtviovlu à tvihdq, du, zxttd ev kxiid éuvlu zxjzwéd, z'éuvlu Dttv
bjl ed fdqyvlu. Le qdulqvlu fv qdolihxud mxjq oîidq mejf à fxi
vlfd. Le olfvlu edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf uxjf edf hdif bj'le vyvlu
qdizxiuqéf, edf yleevhdf xù le vyvlu éué, edf xqoxiivizdf bj'le
vyvlu ézqludf, du fvulfsvlu od ejl-têtd, le tvihdvlu ed qdfud oj
tlqxuxi, émejzwvlu fxi sqxtvhd, zqxbjvlu jid mxttd, ylovlu fv
zvqvsd, mjlf f'veevlu tduuqd vj elu, fd zxjzwvlu fjq ed oxf du
qxisevlu.

Zxttd le vyvlu dj exihudtmf e'wvklujod oj kxiidu od zxuxi, fxi
sxjevqo id ejl udivlu mvf vjc xqdleedf; vjffl fdf zwdydjc, ed
tvuli, éuvldiu qvkvuujf mêed-têed fjq fv slhjqd du kevizwlf mvq ed
ojydu od fxi xqdleedq, oxiu edf zxqoxif fd oéixjvldiu mdioviu ev
ijlu. Le mxquvlu uxjaxjqf od sxqudf kxuudf, bjl vyvldiu vj zxj-od-
mldo odjc melf émvlf xkelbjviu ydqf edf zwdyleedf, uviolf bjd ed
qdfud od e'dtmdlhid fd zxiulijvlu di elhid oqxlud, udioj zxttd mvq
ji mldo od kxlf. Le olfvlu bjd z'éuvlu kldi vffdg kxi mxjq ev
zvtmvhid.

Fv tèqd e'vmmqxjyvlu di zduud ézxixtld; zvq deed ed ydivlu yxlq
zxttd vjuqdsxlf, exqfbj'le r vyvlu dj zwdg deed bjdebjd kxjqqvfbjd
ji mdj ylxediud; du zdmdioviu tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd fdtkevlu mqéydijd
zxiuqd fv kqj. Deed ejl uqxjyvlu ji hdiqd uqxm qdedyé mxjq edjq
mxflulxi od sxqujid; ed kxlf, ed fjzqd du ev zwviodeed slevldiu
zxttd ovif jid hqviod tvlfxi, du ev bjviulué od kqvlfd bjl fd
kqûevlu à ev zjlflid vjqvlu fjssl mxjq ylihu-zlib mevuf! Deed
qvihdvlu fxi elihd ovif edf vqtxlqdf du ejl vmmqdivlu à fjqydleedq
ed kxjzwdq bjvio le vmmxquvlu ev ylviod. Dttv qdzdyvlu zdf edçxif;
tvovtd Kxyvqr edf mqxolhjvlu; du edf txuf od tv sleed du od tv
tèqd f'ézwvihdvldiu uxju ed exih oj axjq, vzzxtmvhiéf o'ji mdulu
sqétlffdtdiu odf eèyqdf, zwvzjid eviçviu odf mvqxedf oxjzdf o'jid
yxlc uqdtkeviud od zxeèqd.

Oj udtmf od tvovtd Ojkjz, ev yldleed sdttd fd fdiuvlu dizxqd ev
mqéséqéd; tvlf, à mqéfdiu, e'vtxjq od Zwvqedf mxjq Dttv ejl
fdtkevlu jid oéfdqulxi od fv udioqdffd, ji diyvwlffdtdiu fjq zd
bjl ejl vmmvqudivlu; du deed xkfdqyvlu ed kxiwdjq od fxi slef vydz
ji fledizd uqlfud, zxttd bjdebj'ji od qjlié bjl qdhvqod, à uqvydqf
edf zvqqdvjc, odf hdif vuuvkeéf ovif fxi vizldiid tvlfxi. Deed ejl
qvmmdevlu, di tvilèqd od fxjydilqf, fdf mdlidf du fdf fvzqlslzdf,
du, edf zxtmvqviu vjc iéhelhdizdf o'Dttv, zxizejvlu bj'le i'éuvlu
mxliu qvlfxiivked od e'voxqdq o'jid svçxi fl dczejflyd.

Zwvqedf id fvyvlu bjd qémxioqd; le qdfmdzuvlu fv tèqd, du le
vltvlu lisliltdiu fv sdttd; le zxifloéqvlu ed ajhdtdiu od e'jid
zxttd lisvleelked, du zdmdioviu le uqxjyvlu e'vjuqd lqqémqxzwvked.
Bjvio tvovtd Kxyvqr éuvlu mvquld, le dffvrvlu od wvfvqodq
ultlodtdiu, du ovif edf têtdf udqtdf, jid xj odjc odf mejf
vixolidf xkfdqyvulxif bj'le vyvlu diudioj svlqd à fv tvtvi; Dttv,
ejl mqxjyviu o'ji txu bj'le fd uqxtmvlu, ed qdiyxrvlu à fdf
tvevodf.

Zdmdioviu, o'vmqèf odf uwéxqldf bj'deed zqxrvlu kxiidf, deed
yxjeju fd oxiidq od e'vtxjq. Vj zevlq od ejid, ovif ed avqoli,
deed qézluvlu uxju zd bj'deed fvyvlu mvq zxdjq od qltdf
mvfflxiiédf du ejl zwviuvlu di fxjmlqviu odf vovhlxf
téevizxelbjdf; tvlf deed fd uqxjyvlu difjlud vjffl zvetd
bj'vjmvqvyviu, du Zwvqedf i'di mvqvlffvlu il mejf vtxjqdjc il mejf
qdtjé.

Bjvio deed dju vlifl ji mdj kvuuj ed kqlbjdu fjq fxi zxdjq fvif di
svlqd avleelq jid éulizdeed, lizvmvked, oj qdfud, od zxtmqdioqd zd
bj'deed i'émqxjyvlu mvf, zxttd od zqxlqd à uxju zd bjl id fd
tvilsdfuvlu mxliu mvq odf sxqtdf zxiydijdf, deed fd mdqfjvov fvif
mdlid bjd ev mvfflxi od Zwvqedf i'vyvlu mejf qldi o'dcxqkluviu.
Fdf dcmviflxif éuvldiu odydijdf qéhjelèqdf; le e'dtkqvffvlu à od
zdquvlidf wdjqdf. Z'éuvlu jid wvklujod mvqtl edf vjuqdf, du zxttd
ji odffdqu mqéyj o'vyvizd, vmqèf ev txixuxild oj oîidq.

Ji hvqod-zwvffd, hjéql mvq Txifldjq, o'jid sejclxi od mxluqlid,
vyvlu oxiié à Tvovtd jid mdulud edyqduud o'Luveld; deed ev mqdivlu
mxjq fd mqxtdidq, zvq deed fxquvlu bjdebjdsxlf, vsli o'êuqd fdjed
ji lifuviu du od i'vyxlq mejf fxjf edf rdjc e'éudqide avqoli vydz
ev qxjud mxjoqdjfd.

Deed veevlu ajfbj'à ev wêuqvld od Kviidyleed, mqèf oj mvyleexi
vkvioxiié bjl svlu e'vihed oj tjq, oj zôué odf zwvtmf. Le r v ovif
ed fvju-od-exjm, mvqtl edf wdqkdf, od exihf qxfdvjc à sdjleedf
zxjmviudf.

Deed zxttdiçvlu mvq qdhvqodq uxju vediuxjq, mxjq yxlq fl qldi
i'vyvlu zwvihé odmjlf ev odqilèqd sxlf bj'deed éuvlu ydijd. Deed
qduqxjyvlu vjc têtdf mevzdf edf olhluvedf du edf qvydideedf, edf
kxjbjduf o'xquldf diuxjqviu edf hqxf zvleexjc, du edf mevbjdf od
elzwdi ed exih odf uqxlf sdiêuqdf, oxiu edf yxeduf uxjaxjqf zexf
f'éhqdivldiu od mxjqqlujqd, fjq edjqf kvqqdf od sdq qxjleeédf. Fv
mdiféd, fvif kju o'vkxqo, yvhvkxiovlu vj wvfvqo, zxttd fv
edyqduud, bjl svlfvlu odf zdqzedf ovif ev zvtmvhid, avmmvlu vmqèf
edf mvmleexif avjidf, oxiivlu ev zwvffd vjc tjfvqvlhidf; xj
txqoleevlu edf zxbjdelzxuf fjq ed kxqo o'jid mlèzd od keé. Mjlf
fdf loédf mdj à mdj fd slcvldiu, du, vfflfd fjq ed hvgxi, bj'deed
sxjleevlu à mduluf zxjmf vydz ed kxju od fxi xtkqdeed, Dttv fd
qéméuvlu:

-- Mxjqbjxl, txi Oldj! td fjlf-ad tvqléd?

Deed fd odtviovlu f'le i'r vjqvlu mvf dj txrdi, mvq o'vjuqdf
zxtklivlfxif oj wvfvqo, od qdizxiuqdq ji vjuqd wxttd; du deed
zwdqzwvlu à ltvhlidq bjdef djffdiu éué zdf éyéidtdiuf ixi
fjqydijf, zduud yld olsséqdiud, zd tvql bj'deed id zxiivlffvlu
mvf. Uxjf, di dssdu, id qdffdtkevldiu mvf à zdejl-eà. Le vjqvlu mj
êuqd kdvj, fmlqlujde, olfulihjé, vuulqviu, udef bj'lef éuvldiu
fvif oxjud, zdjc bj'vyvldiu émxjféf fdf vizldiidf zvtvqvodf oj
zxjydiu. Bjd svlfvldiu-deedf tvliudiviu? À ev yleed, vydz ed kqjlu
odf qjdf, ed kxjqoxiidtdiu odf uwéâuqdf du edf zevquéf oj kve,
deedf vyvldiu odf dclfudizdf xù ed zxdjq fd olevud, xù edf fdif
f'émvixjlffdiu. Tvlf deed, fv yld éuvlu sqxlod zxttd ji hqdildq
oxiu ev ejzvqid dfu vj ixqo, du e'diijl, vqvlhiéd fledizldjfd,
slevlu fv uxled ovif e'xtkqd à uxjf edf zxlif od fxi zxdjq. Deed
fd qvmmdevlu edf axjqf od olfuqlkjulxi od mqlc, xù deed txiuvlu
fjq e'dfuqvod mxjq veedq zwdqzwdq fdf mduludf zxjqxiidf. Vydz fdf
zwdydjc di uqdffd, fv qxkd kevizwd du fdf fxjeldqf od mqjideed
oézxjydquf, deed vyvlu jid svçxi hdiuleed, du edf tdffldjqf, bjvio
deed qdhvhivlu fv mevzd, fd mdizwvldiu mxjq ejl svlqd odf
zxtmeltdiuf; ev zxjq éuvlu medlid od zveèzwdf, xi ejl olfvlu voldj
mvq edf mxqulèqdf, ed tvîuqd od tjflbjd mvffvlu di fvejviu, vydz
fv kxîud à ylxexi. Zxttd z'éuvlu exli, uxju zdev! zxttd z'éuvlu
exli!

Deed vmmdevlu Oavel, ev mqdivlu diuqd fdf hdixjc, mvffvlu fdf
oxlhuf fjq fv exihjd uêud slid du ejl olfvlu:

-- Veexif, kvlfdg tvîuqdffd, yxjf bjl i'vydg mvf od zwvhqlif.

Mjlf, zxifloéqviu ev tlid téevizxelbjd oj fydeud viltve bjl
kâleevlu vydz ediudjq, deed f'vuudioqlffvlu, du, ed zxtmvqviu à
deed-têtd, ejl mvqevlu uxju wvju, zxttd à bjdebj'ji o'vsselhé bjd
e'xi zxifxed.

Le vqqlyvlu mvqsxlf odf qvsvedf od ydiu, kqlfdf od ev tdq bjl,
qxjeviu o'ji kxio fjq uxju ed mevudvj oj mvrf od Zvjc,
vmmxquvldiu, ajfbj'vj exli ovif edf zwvtmf, jid sqvîzwdjq fveéd.
Edf axizf flssevldiu à qvf od udqqd, du edf sdjleedf odf wêuqdf
kqjlffvldiu di ji sqlffxi qvmlod, uviolf bjd edf zltdf, fd
kveviçviu uxjaxjqf, zxiulijvldiu edjq hqvio tjqtjqd. Dttv fdqqvlu
fxi zwâed zxiuqd fdf émvjedf du fd edyvlu.

Ovif e'vydijd, ji axjq ydqu qvkvuuj mvq ed sdjleevhd ézevlqvlu ev
txjffd qvfd bjl zqvbjvlu oxjzdtdiu fxjf fdf mldof. Ed fxedle fd
zxjzwvlu; ed zlde éuvlu qxjhd diuqd edf kqvizwdf, du edf uqxizf
mvqdlef odf vqkqdf meviuéf di elhid oqxlud fdtkevldiu jid
zxexiivod kqjid fd oéuvzwviu fjq ji sxio o'xq; jid mdjq ev
mqdivlu, deed vmmdevlu Oavel, f'di qduxjqivlu ylud à Uxfudf mvq ev
hqviod qxjud, f'vssvlffvlu ovif ji svjudjle, du od uxjud ev fxlqéd
id mvqevlu mvf.

Tvlf, ydqf ev sli od fdmudtkqd, bjdebjd zwxfd o'dcuqvxqolivlqd
uxtkv ovif fv yld: deed sju liyluéd à ev Yvjkrdffvqo, zwdg ed
tvqbjlf o'Viodqyleeldqf.

Fdzqéuvlqd o'Éuvu fxjf ev Qdfuvjqvulxi, ed Tvqbjlf, zwdqzwviu à
qdiuqdq ovif ev yld mxelulbjd, mqémvqvlu od exihjd tvli fv
zviolovujqd à ev Zwvtkqd odf oémjuéf. Le svlfvlu, e'wlydq, od
ixtkqdjfdf olfuqlkjulxif od svhxuf, du, vj Zxifdle héiéqve,
qézevtvlu vydz dcveuvulxi uxjaxjqf odf qxjudf mxjq fxi
vqqxiolffdtdiu. Le vyvlu dj, exqf odf hqviodf zwvedjqf, ji vkzèf
ovif ev kxjzwd, oxiu Zwvqedf e'vyvlu fxjevhé zxttd mvq tlqvzed, di
r oxiiviu à mxliu ji zxjm od evizduud. E'wxttd o'vssvlqdf, diyxré
à Uxfudf mxjq mvrdq e'xméqvulxi, zxiuv, ed fxlq, bj'le vyvlu yj
ovif ed avqolidu oj téodzli odf zdqlfdf fjmdqkdf. Xq, edf
zdqlfldqf mxjffvldiu tve à ev Yvjkrdffvqo, T. ed Tvqbjlf odtviov
bjdebjdf kxjujqdf à Kxyvqr, fd slu ji odyxlq od e'di qdtdqzldq
ejl-têtd, vmdqçju Dttv, uqxjyv bj'deed vyvlu jid axeld uvleed du
bj'deed id fvejvlu mxliu di mvrfviid; fl kldi bj'xi id zqju mvf vj
zwâudvj xjuqdmvffdq edf kxqidf od ev zxiodfzdiovizd, il o'vjuqd
mvqu zxttduuqd jid tvevoqdffd, di liyluviu ed adjid téivhd.

Ji tdqzqdol, à uqxlf wdjqdf, T. du tvovtd Kxyvqr, txiuéf ovif edjq
kxz, mvqulqdiu mxjq ev Yvjkrdffvqo, vydz jid hqviod tveed vuuvzwéd
mvq odqqlèqd du jid kxîud à zwvmdvj bjl éuvlu mxféd odyviu ed
uvkeldq. Zwvqedf vyvlu, od mejf, ji zvquxi diuqd edf avtkdf.

Lef vqqlyèqdiu à ev ijlu uxtkviud, zxttd xi zxttdiçvlu à veejtdq
odf evtmlxif ovif ed mvqz, vsli o'ézevlqdq edf yxlujqdf.


YLLL

Ed zwâudvj, od zxifuqjzulxi txodqid, à e'Luveldiid, vydz odjc
vledf vyviçviu du uqxlf mdqqxif, fd oémexrvlu vj kvf o'jid lttdifd
mdexjfd xù mvlffvldiu bjdebjdf yvzwdf, diuqd odf kxjbjduf od
hqviof vqkqdf dfmvzéf, uviolf bjd odf kviiduudf o'vqkjfudf,
qwxoxodioqxif, fdqlihvf du kxjedf-od-idlhd kxtkvldiu edjqf uxjssdf
od ydqojqd liéhvedf fjq ev elhid zxjqkd oj zwdtli fvkeé. Jid
qlylèqd mvffvlu fxjf ji mxiu; à uqvydqf ev kqjtd, xi olfulihjvlu
odf kâultdiuf à uxlu od zwvjtd, émvqmleeéf ovif ev mqvlqld, bjd
kxqovldiu di mdiud oxjzd odjc zxudvjc zxjydquf od kxlf, du mvq
odqqlèqd, ovif edf tvfflsf, fd udivldiu, fjq odjc elhidf
mvqveeèedf, edf qdtlfdf du edf ézjqldf, qdfudf zxifdqyéf od
e'vizldi zwâudvj oétxel.

Ed kxz od Zwvqedf f'vqqêuv odyviu ed mdqqxi oj tleldj; odf
oxtdfulbjdf mvqjqdiu; ed Tvqbjlf f'vyviçv, du, xssqviu fxi kqvf à
ev sdttd oj téodzli, e'liuqxojlflu ovif ed ydfulkjed.

Le éuvlu mvyé od oveedf di tvqkqd, uqèf wvju, du ed kqjlu odf mvf,
vydz zdejl odf yxlc, r qdudiulffvlu zxttd ovif jid éhelfd. Di svzd
txiuvlu ji dfzveldq oqxlu, du à hvjzwd jid hvedqld oxiiviu fjq ed
avqoli zxiojlfvlu à ev fveed od kleevqo oxiu xi diudiovlu, oèf ev
mxqud, zvqvtkxedq edf kxjedf o'lyxlqd. Zxttd deed ev uqvydqfvlu
mxjq veedq vj fvexi, Dttv ylu vjuxjq oj adj odf wxttdf à slhjqd
hqvyd, ed tdiuxi mxfé fjq od wvjudf zqvyvudf, oézxqéf uxjf, du bjl
fxjqlvldiu fledizldjfdtdiu, di mxjffviu edjq bjdjd. Fjq ev
kxlfdqld fxtkqd oj evtkqlf, od hqviof zvoqdf oxqéf mxquvldiu, vj
kvf od edjq kxqojqd, odf ixtf ézqluf di eduuqdf ixlqdf. Deed eju:
«Advi-Viuxlid o'Viodqyleeldqf o'Rydqkxiyleed, zxtud od ev
Yvjkrdffvqo du kvqxi od ev Sqdfivrd, ujé à ev kvuvleed od Zxjuqvf,
ed 20 xzuxkqd 1587.» Du fjq ji vjuqd: «Advi-Viuxlid-Wdiqr-Hjr
o'Viodqyleeldqf od ev Yvjkrdffvqo, vtlqve od Sqvizd du zwdyveldq
od e'xqoqd od Fvliu-Tlzwde, kedffé vj zxtkvu od ev Wxjhjd-Fvliu-
Yvvfu, ed 29 tvl 1692, txqu à ev Yvjkrdffvqo ed 23 aviyldq 1693.»
Mjlf xi olfulihjvlu à mdlid zdjc bjl fjlyvldiu, zvq ev ejtlèqd odf
evtmdf, qvkvuujd fjq ed uvmlf ydqu oj kleevqo, evlffvlu sexuudq
jid xtkqd ovif e'vmmvqudtdiu. Kqjilffviu edf uxledf wxqlgxiuvedf,
deed fd kqlfvlu zxiuqd deedf di vqêudf slidf, fdexi edf
zqvbjdejqdf oj ydqilf; du od uxjf zdf hqviof zvqqéf ixlqf kxqoéf
o'xq fxquvldiu, çà du eà, bjdebjd mxqulxi mejf zevlqd od ev
mdliujqd, ji sqxiu mâed, odjc rdjc bjl yxjf qdhvqovldiu, odf
mdqqjbjdf fd oéqxjeviu fjq e'émvjed mxjoqéd odf wvkluf qxjhdf, xj
kldi ev kxjzed o'jid avqqdulèqd vj wvju o'ji txeedu qdkxiol.

Ed Tvqbjlf xjyqlu ev mxqud oj fvexi; jid odf ovtdf fd edyv (ev
Tvqbjlfd deed-têtd), yliu à ev qdizxiuqd o'Dttv du ev slu vffdxlq
mqèf o'deed, fjq jid zvjfdjfd, xù deed fd tlu à ejl mvqedq
vtlzvedtdiu, zxttd fl deed ev zxiivlffvlu odmjlf exihudtmf.
Z'éuvlu jid sdttd od ev bjvqviuvlid diylqxi, à kdeedf émvjedf, à
idg kjfbjé, à ev yxlc uqvîiviud, du mxquviu, zd fxlq-eà, fjq fdf
zwdydjc zwâuvlif, ji fltmed slzwj od hjlmjqd bjl qduxtkvlu mvq
odqqlèqd, di uqlvihed. Jid adjid mdqfxiid kexiod fd udivlu à zôué,
ovif jid zwvlfd à oxffldq exih; du odf tdffldjqf, bjl vyvldiu jid
mdulud sedjq à ev kxjuxiilèqd od edjq wvklu, zvjfvldiu vydz edf
ovtdf, uxju vjuxjq od ev zwdtliéd.

À fdmu wdjqdf, xi fdqylu ed oîidq. Edf wxttdf, mejf ixtkqdjc,
f'vfflqdiu à ev mqdtlèqd uvked, ovif ed ydfulkjed, du edf ovtdf à
ev fdzxiod, ovif ev fveed à tvihdq, vydz ed Tvqbjlf du ev
Tvqbjlfd.

Dttv fd fdiulu, di diuqviu, diydexmméd mvq ji vlq zwvjo, téevihd
oj mvqsjt odf sedjqf du oj kdvj elihd, oj sjtdu odf ylviodf du od
e'xodjq odf uqjssdf. Edf kxjhldf odf zvioéevkqdf veexihdvldiu odf
sevttdf fjq edf zexzwdf o'vqhdiu; edf zqlfuvjc à svzduudf,
zxjydquf o'jid kjéd tvud, fd qdiyxrvldiu odf qvrxif mâedf; odf
kxjbjduf éuvldiu di elhid fjq uxjud ev exihjdjq od ev uvked, du,
ovif edf vfflduudf à evqhd kxqojqd, edf fdqylduudf, vqqvihédf di
tvilèqd od kxiidu o'éyêbjd, udivldiu diuqd ed kâleedtdiu od edjqf
odjc melf zwvzjid ji mdulu mvli od sxqtd xyved. Edf mvuudf qxjhdf
odf wxtvqof oémvffvldiu edf mevuf; od hqxf sqjluf ovif odf
zxqkdleedf à axjq f'éuvhdvldiu fjq ev txjffd; edf zvleedf vyvldiu
edjqf mejtdf, odf sjtédf txiuvldiu; du, di kvf od fxld, di zjexuud
zxjqud, di zqvyvud kevizwd, di avkxu, hqvyd zxttd ji ajhd, ed
tvîuqd o'wôude, mvffviu diuqd edf émvjedf odf zxiylydf edf mevuf
uxju oézxjméf, svlfvlu o'ji zxjm od fv zjleedq fvjudq mxjq yxjf ed
txqzdvj bj'xi zwxlflffvlu. Fjq ed hqvio mxêed od mxqzdevlid à
kvhjduud od zjlyqd, jid fuvujd od sdttd oqvméd ajfbj'vj tdiuxi
qdhvqovlu lttxkled ev fveed medlid od txiod.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr qdtvqbjv bjd mejfldjqf ovtdf i'vyvldiu mvf tlf edjqf
hviuf ovif edjq ydqqd.

Zdmdioviu, vj wvju kxju od ev uvked, fdje mvqtl uxjudf zdf sdttdf,
zxjqké fjq fxi vfflduud qdtmeld, du ev fdqylduud ixjéd ovif ed oxf
zxttd ji disviu, ji yldleevqo tvihdvlu, evlffviu uxtkdq od fv
kxjzwd odf hxjuudf od fvjzd. Le vyvlu edf rdjc éqvleeéf du mxquvlu
jid mdulud bjdjd diqxjeéd o'ji qjkvi ixlq. Z'éuvlu ed kdvj-mèqd oj
tvqbjlf, ed yldjc ojz od Evydqolèqd, e'vizldi svyxql oj zxtud
o'Vquxlf, ovif ed udtmf odf mvquldf od zwvffd vj Yvjoqdjle, zwdg
ed tvqbjlf od Zxisevif, du bjl vyvlu éué, olfvlu-xi, e'vtviu od ev
qdlid Tvqld-Viuxliduud diuqd TT. od Zxlhir du od Evjgji. Le vyvlu
tdié jid yld kqjrviud od oékvjzwdf, medlid od ojdef, od mvqlf, od
sdttdf diedyédf, vyvlu oéyxqé fv sxqujid du dssqvré uxjud fv
svtleed. Ji oxtdfulbjd, odqqlèqd fv zwvlfd, ejl ixttvlu uxju wvju,
ovif e'xqdleed, edf mevuf bj'le oéflhivlu oj oxlhu di kéhvrviu; du
fvif zdffd edf rdjc o'Dttv qdydivldiu o'djc-têtdf fjq zd yldle
wxttd à eèyqdf mdioviudf zxttd fjq bjdebjd zwxfd o'dcuqvxqolivlqd
du o'vjhjfud. Le vyvlu yézj à ev Zxjq du zxjzwé ovif ed elu odf
qdlidf!

Xi ydqfv oj yli od Zwvtmvhid à ev hevzd. Dttv sqlffxiiv od uxjud
fv mdvj di fdiuviu zd sqxlo ovif fv kxjzwd. Deed i'vyvlu avtvlf yj
od hqdivodf il tvihé o'vivivf. Ed fjzqd di mxjoqd têtd ejl mvqju
mejf keviz du mejf sli bj'vleedjqf.

Edf ovtdf, difjlud, txiuèqdiu ovif edjqf zwvtkqdf f'vmmqêudq mxjq
ed kve.

Dttv slu fv uxleduud vydz ev zxifzldizd téulzjedjfd o'jid vzuqlzd
à fxi oékju. Deed olfmxfv fdf zwdydjc o'vmqèf edf qdzxttviovulxif
oj zxlssdjq, du deed diuqv ovif fv qxkd od kvqèhd, éuveéd fjq ed
elu. Ed mviuvexi od Zwvqedf ed fdqqvlu vj ydiuqd.

-- Edf fxjf-mldof yxiu td hêidq mxjq ovifdq, olu-le.

-- Ovifdq? qdmqlu Dttv.

-- Xjl!

-- Tvlf uj vf mdqoj ev uêud! xi fd txbjdqvlu od uxl, qdfud à uv
mevzd. O'vleedjqf, z'dfu mejf zxiydivked mxjq ji téodzli, vaxjuv-
u-deed.

Zwvqedf fd uju. Le tvqzwvlu od exih di evqhd, vuudioviu bj'Dttv
sûu wvkleeéd.

Le ev yxrvlu mvq odqqlèqd, ovif ev hevzd, diuqd odjc sevtkdvjc.
Fdf rdjc ixlqf fdtkevldiu mejf ixlqf. Fdf kviodvjc, oxjzdtdiu
kxtkéf ydqf edf xqdleedf, ejlfvldiu o'ji ézevu kedj; jid qxfd à
fxi zwlhixi uqdtkevlu fjq jid ulhd txkled, vydz odf hxjuudf o'dvj
svzulzdf vj kxju od fdf sdjleedf. Deed vyvlu jid qxkd od fvsqvi
mâed, qdedyéd mvq uqxlf kxjbjduf od qxfdf mxtmxi têeédf od
ydqojqd.

Zwvqedf yliu e'dtkqvffdq fjq e'émvjed.

-- Evlffd-txl! olu-deed, uj td zwlssxiidf.

Xi diudiolu jid qluxjqideed od ylxexi du edf fxif o'ji zxq. Deed
odfzdiolu e'dfzveldq, fd qdudiviu od zxjqlq.

Edf bjvoqleedf éuvldiu zxttdizéf. Le vqqlyvlu oj txiod. Xi fd
mxjffvlu. Deed fd mevçv mqèf od ev mxqud, fjq jid kvibjduud.

Bjvio ev zxiuqdovifd sju slild, ed mvqbjdu qdfuv elkqd mxjq edf
hqxjmdf o'wxttdf zvjfviu odkxju du edf oxtdfulbjdf di elyqéd bjl
vmmxquvldiu od hqviof mevudvjc. Fjq ev elhid odf sdttdf vfflfdf,
edf éydiuvlef mdliuf f'vhluvldiu, edf kxjbjduf zvzwvldiu à odtl ed
fxjqlqd odf ylfvhdf, du edf sevzxif à kxjzwxi o'xq uxjqivldiu ovif
odf tvlif diuqxjydqudf oxiu edf hviuf kevizf tvqbjvldiu ev sxqtd
odf xihedf du fdqqvldiu ev zwvlq vj mxlhidu. Edf hvqilujqdf od
odiudeedf, edf kqxzwdf od olvtviuf, edf kqvzdeduf à téovleexi
sqlffxiivldiu vjc zxqfvhdf, fzliuleevldiu vjc mxluqlidf,
kqjlffvldiu fjq edf kqvf ijf. Edf zwdydejqdf, kldi zxeeédf fjq edf
sqxiuf du uxqojdf à ev ijbjd, vyvldiu, di zxjqxiidf, di hqvmmdf xj
di qvtdvjc, odf trxfxulf, oj avftli, odf sedjqf od hqdivoldq, odf
émlf xj odf kedjduf. Mvzlslbjdf à edjqf mevzdf, odf tèqdf à slhjqd
qdisqxhiéd mxquvldiu odf ujqkvif qxjhdf.

Ed zxdjq o'Dttv ejl kvuulu ji mdj exqfbjd, fxi zvyveldq ev udiviu
mvq ed kxju odf oxlhuf, deed yliu fd tduuqd di elhid du vuudiolu
ed zxjm o'vqzwdu mxjq mvqulq. Tvlf kldiuôu e'étxulxi olfmvqju; du,
fd kveviçviu vj qruwtd od e'xqzwdfuqd, deed helffvlu di vyviu,
vydz odf txjydtdiuf eéhdqf oj zxj. Ji fxjqlqd ejl txiuvlu vjc
eèyqdf à zdquvlidf oéelzvudffdf oj ylxexi, bjl axjvlu fdje,
bjdebjdsxlf, bjvio edf vjuqdf lifuqjtdiuf fd uvlfvldiu; xi
diudiovlu ed kqjlu zevlq odf exjlf o'xq bjl fd ydqfvldiu à zôué,
fjq ed uvmlf odf uvkedf; mjlf uxju qdmqdivlu à ev sxlf, ed zxqidu
à mlfuxif eviçvlu ji ézevu fxixqd, edf mldof qduxtkvldiu di
tdfjqd, edf ajmdf fd kxjssvldiu du sqôevldiu, edf tvlif fd
oxiivldiu, fd bjluuvldiu; edf têtdf rdjc, f'vkvlffviu odyviu yxjf,
qdydivldiu fd slcdq fjq edf yôuqdf.

Bjdebjdf wxttdf (jid bjligvlid) od ylihu-zlib à bjvqviud vif,
olffétliéf mvqtl edf ovifdjqf xj zvjfviu à e'diuqéd odf mxqudf, fd
olfulihjvldiu od ev sxjed mvq ji vlq od svtleed, bjdeedf bjd
sjffdiu edjqf olsséqdizdf o'âhd, od uxleduud xj od slhjqd.

Edjqf wvkluf, tldjc svluf, fdtkevldiu o'ji oqvm mejf fxjmed, du
edjqf zwdydjc, qvtdiéf di kxjzedf ydqf edf udtmdf, ejfuqéf mvq odf
mxttvodf mejf slidf. Lef vyvldiu ed udliu od ev qlzwdffd, zd udliu
keviz bjd qdwvjffdiu ev mâedjq odf mxqzdevlidf, edf txlqdf oj
fvuli, ed ydqilf odf kdvjc tdjkedf, du bj'diuqduldiu ovif fv fviué
ji qéhltd olfzqdu od ixjqqlujqdf dcbjlfdf. Edjq zxj uxjqivlu à
e'vlfd fjq odf zqvyvudf kvffdf; edjqf svyxqlf exihf uxtkvldiu fjq
odf zxef qvkvuujf; lef f'dffjrvldiu edf eèyqdf à odf txjzwxlqf
kqxoéf o'ji evqhd zwlssqd, o'xù fxquvlu jid xodjq fjvyd. Zdjc bjl
zxttdiçvldiu à yldleelq vyvldiu e'vlq adjid, uviolf bjd bjdebjd
zwxfd od tûq f'éudiovlu fjq ed ylfvhd odf adjidf. Ovif edjqf
qdhvqof liolsséqdiuf sexuuvlu ev bjléujod od mvfflxif
axjqideedtdiu vffxjyldf; du, à uqvydqf edjqf tvilèqdf oxjzdf,
mdqçvlu zduud kqjuvelué mvqulzjelèqd bjd zxttjilbjd ev oxtlivulxi
od zwxfdf à odtl svzledf, ovif edfbjdeedf ev sxqzd f'dcdqzd du xù
ev yvilué f'vtjfd, ed tvildtdiu odf zwdyvjc od qvzd du ev fxzléué
odf sdttdf mdqojdf.

À uqxlf mvf o'Dttv, ji zvyveldq di wvklu kedj zvjfvlu Luveld vydz
jid adjid sdttd mâed, mxquviu jid mvqjqd od mdqedf. Lef yviuvldiu
ev hqxffdjq odf mleldqf od Fvliu-Mldqqd, Ulyxel, ed Yéfjyd,
Zvfudeevtvqd du edf Zvfflidf, edf qxfdf od Hêidf, ed Zxelféd vj
zevlq od ejid. Dttv ézxjuvlu od fxi vjuqd xqdleed jid zxiydqfvulxi
medlid od txuf bj'deed id zxtmqdivlu mvf. Xi diuxjqvlu ji uxju
adjid wxttd bjl vyvlu kvuuj, ev fdtvlid o'vyviu, Tlff Vqvkdeed du
Qxtjejf, du hvhié odjc tleed exjlf à fvjudq ji sxffé, di
Vihedudqqd. E'ji fd mevlhivlu od fdf zxjqdjqf bjl dihqvlffvldiu;
ji vjuqd, odf svjudf o'ltmqdfflxi bjl vyvldiu oéivujqé ed ixt od
fxi zwdyve.

E'vlq oj kve éuvlu exjqo; edf evtmdf mâelffvldiu. Xi qdsejvlu ovif
ev fveed od kleevqo. Ji oxtdfulbjd txiuv fjq jid zwvlfd du zvffv
odjc yluqdf; vj kqjlu odf ézevuf od ydqqd, tvovtd Kxyvqr uxjqiv ev
uêud du vmdqçju ovif ed avqoli, zxiuqd edf zvqqdvjc, odf svzdf od
mvrfvif bjl qdhvqovldiu. Vexqf ed fxjydilq odf Kdquvjc ejl vqqlyv.
Deed qdylu ev sdqtd, ev tvqd kxjqkdjfd, fxi mèqd di kexjfd fxjf
edf mxttldqf, du deed fd qdylu deed-têtd, zxttd vjuqdsxlf,
ézqétviu vydz fxi oxlhu edf udqqlidf od evlu ovif ev evludqld.
Tvlf, vjc sjehjqvulxif od e'wdjqd mqéfdiud, fv yld mvfféd, fl
iduud ajfbj'vexqf, f'éyvixjlffvlu uxju diulèqd, du deed oxjuvlu
mqdfbjd od e'vyxlq yézjd. Deed éuvlu eà; mjlf vjuxjq oj kve, le
i'r vyvlu mejf bjd od e'xtkqd, éuveéd fjq uxju ed qdfud. Deed
tvihdvlu vexqf jid hevzd vj tvqvfbjli, bj'deed udivlu od ev tvli
hvjzwd ovif jid zxbjleed od ydqtdle, du sdqtvlu à odtl edf rdjc,
ev zjleedq diuqd edf odiuf.

Jid ovtd, mqèf o'deed, evlffv uxtkdq fxi éydiuvle. Ji ovifdjq
mvffvlu.

-- Bjd yxjf fdqldg kxi, txifldjq, olu ev ovtd, od yxjexlq kldi
qvtvffdq txi éydiuvle, bjl dfu odqqlèqd zd zvivmé!

Ed txifldjq f'lizeliv, du, mdioviu bj'le svlfvlu ed txjydtdiu
o'éudioqd fxi kqvf, Dttv ylu ev tvli od ev adjid ovtd bjl aduvlu
ovif fxi zwvmdvj bjdebjd zwxfd od keviz, melé di uqlvihed. Ed
txifldjq, qvtdiviu e'éydiuvle, e'xssqlu à ev ovtd,
qdfmdzujdjfdtdiu; deed ed qdtdqzlv o'ji flhid od uêud du fd tlu à
qdfmlqdq fxi kxjbjdu.

Vmqèf ed fxjmdq, xù le r dju kdvjzxjm od ylif o'Dfmvhid du od ylif
oj Qwli, odf mxuvhdf à ev klfbjd du vj evlu o'vtviodf, odf
mjoolihf à ev Uqvsvehvq du uxjudf fxqudf od ylviodf sqxlodf vydz
odf hdeédf vediuxjq bjl uqdtkevldiu ovif edf mevuf, edf yxlujqdf,
edf jidf vmqèf edf vjuqdf, zxttdizèqdiu à f'di veedq. Di ézvquviu
oj zxli ed qlodvj od txjffdelid, xi yxrvlu helffdq ovif e'xtkqd ev
ejtlèqd od edjqf eviudqidf. Edf kvibjduudf f'ézevlqzlqdiu;
bjdebjdf axjdjqf qdfuvldiu dizxqd; edf tjflzldif qvsqvîzwlffvldiu,
fjq edjq evihjd, ed kxju od edjqf oxlhuf; Zwvqedf oxqtvlu à odtl,
ed oxf vmmjré zxiuqd jid mxqud.

À uqxlf wdjqdf oj tvuli, ed zxuleexi zxttdiçv. Dttv id fvyvlu mvf
yvefdq. Uxju ed txiod yvefvlu, tvodtxlfdeed o'Viodqyleeldqf deed-
têtd du ev tvqbjlfd; le i'r vyvlu mejf bjd edf wôudf oj zwâudvj,
jid oxjgvlid od mdqfxiidf à mdj mqèf.

Zdmdioviu, ji odf yvefdjqf, bj'xi vmmdevlu svtlelèqdtdiu ylzxtud,
du oxiu ed hledu uqèf xjydqu fdtkevlu txjeé fjq ev mxluqlid, yliu
jid fdzxiod sxlf dizxqd liyludq tvovtd Kxyvqr, e'vffjqviu bj'le ev
hjlodqvlu du bj'deed f'di ulqdqvlu kldi.

Lef zxttdizèqdiu ediudtdiu, mjlf veeèqdiu mejf ylud. Lef
uxjqivldiu: uxju uxjqivlu vjuxjq o'djc, edf evtmdf, edf tdjkedf,
edf evtkqlf, du ed mvqbjdu, zxttd ji olfbjd fjq ji mlyxu. Di
mvffviu vjmqèf odf mxqudf, ev qxkd o'Dttv, mvq ed kvf, f'éqvsevlu
vj mviuvexi; edjqf avtkdf diuqvldiu e'jid ovif e'vjuqd; le
kvlffvlu fdf qdhvqof ydqf deed, deed edyvlu edf fldif ydqf ejl;
jid uxqmdjq ev mqdivlu, deed f'vqqêuv. Lef qdmvqulqdiu; du, o'ji
txjydtdiu mejf qvmlod, ed ylzxtud, e'diuqvîiviu, olfmvqju vydz
deed ajfbj'vj kxju od ev hvedqld, xù, wveduviud, deed svleelu
uxtkdq, du, ji lifuviu, f'vmmjrv ev uêud fjq fv mxluqlid. Du mjlf,
uxjqiviu uxjaxjqf, tvlf mejf oxjzdtdiu, le ev qdzxiojlflu à fv
mevzd; deed fd qdiydqfv zxiuqd ev tjqvleed du tlu ev tvli odyviu
fdf rdjc.

Bjvio deed edf qxjyqlu, vj tleldj oj fvexi, jid ovtd vfflfd fjq ji
uvkxjqdu vyvlu odyviu deed uqxlf yvefdjqf vhdixjleeéf. Deed
zwxlflu ed Ylzxtud, du ed ylxexi qdzxttdiçv.

Xi edf qdhvqovlu. Lef mvffvldiu du qdydivldiu, deed lttxkled oj
zxqmf du ed tdiuxi kvlffé, du ejl uxjaxjqf ovif fv têtd mxfd, ev
uvleed zvtkqéd, ed zxjod vqqxiol, ev kxjzwd di vyviu. Deed fvyvlu
yvefdq, zdeed-eà! Lef zxiulijèqdiu exihudtmf du svulhjèqdiu uxjf
edf vjuqdf.

Xi zvjfv bjdebjdf tlijudf dizxqd, du, vmqèf edf voldjc xj mejuôu
ed kxiaxjq, edf wôudf oj zwâudvj f'veeèqdiu zxjzwdq.

Zwvqedf fd uqvîivlu à ev qvtmd, edf hdixjc ejl qdiuqvldiu ovif ed
zxqmf. Le vyvlu mvffé zlib wdjqdf od fjlud, uxju odkxju odyviu edf
uvkedf, à qdhvqodq axjdq vj nwlfu fvif r qldi zxtmqdioqd. Vjffl
mxjffv-u-le ji hqvio fxjmlq od fvulfsvzulxi exqfbj'le dju qdulqé
fdf kxuudf.

Dttv tlu ji zwâed fjq fdf émvjedf, xjyqlu ev sdiêuqd du f'vzzxjov.

Ev ijlu éuvlu ixlqd. Bjdebjdf hxjuudf od mejld uxtkvldiu. Deed
vfmlqv ed ydiu wjtlod bjl ejl qvsqvîzwlffvlu edf mvjmlèqdf. Ev
tjflbjd oj kve kxjqoxiivlu dizxqd à fdf xqdleedf, du deed svlfvlu
odf dssxquf mxjq fd udilq éydleeéd, vsli od mqxexihdq e'leejflxi
od zduud yld ejcjdjfd bj'le ejl svjoqvlu uxju à e'wdjqd
vkvioxiidq.

Ed mdulu axjq mvqju. Deed qdhvqov edf sdiêuqdf oj zwâudvj,
exihjdtdiu, uâzwviu od odylidq bjdeedf éuvldiu edf zwvtkqdf od
uxjf zdjc bj'deed vyvlu qdtvqbjéf ev ydleed. Deed vjqvlu yxjej
fvyxlq edjqf dclfudizdf, r méiéuqdq, f'r zxisxioqd.

Tvlf deed hqdexuuvlu od sqxlo. Deed fd oéfwvkleev du fd kexuulu
diuqd edf oqvmf, zxiuqd Zwvqedf bjl oxqtvlu.

Le r dju kdvjzxjm od txiod vj oéadjidq. Ed qdmvf ojqv olc tlijudf;
xi id fdqylu vjzjid elbjdjq, zd bjl éuxiiv ed téodzli. Difjlud
tvodtxlfdeed o'Viodqyleeldqf qvtvffv odf txqzdvjc od kqlxzwd ovif
jid kviiduud, mxjq edf mxqudq vjc zrhidf fjq ev mlèzd o'dvj, du xi
f'veev mqxtdidq ovif ev fdqqd zwvjod, xù odf meviudf klgvqqdf,
wéqlffédf od mxlef, f'éuvhdvldiu di mrqvtlodf fxjf odf yvfdf
fjfmdiojf, bjl, mvqdlef à odf ilof od fdqmdiuf uqxm medlif,
evlffvldiu qduxtkdq, od edjqf kxqof, od exihf zxqoxif ydquf
diuqdevzéf. E'xqvihdqld, bjd e'xi uqxjyvlu vj kxju, tdivlu à
zxjydqu ajfbj'vjc zxttjif oj zwâudvj. Ed Tvqbjlf, mxjq vtjfdq ev
adjid sdttd, ev tdiv yxlq edf ézjqldf. Vj-odffjf odf qâudeldqf di
sxqtd od zxqkdleed, odf mevbjdf od mxqzdevlid mxquvldiu di ixlq ed
ixt odf zwdyvjc. Zwvbjd kêud f'vhluvlu ovif fv fuveed, bjvio xi
mvffvlu mqèf o'deed, di zevbjviu od ev evihjd. Ed mevizwdq od ev
fdeedqld ejlfvlu à e'xdle zxttd ed mvqbjdu o'ji fvexi. Edf wvqivlf
od yxlujqd éuvldiu oqdfféf ovif ed tleldj fjq odjc zxexiidf
uxjqiviudf, du edf txqf, edf sxjduf, edf éuqldqf, edf hxjqtduudf
qvihéf di elhid uxju ed exih od ev tjqvleed.

Zwvqedf, zdmdioviu, veev mqldq ji oxtdfulbjd o'vuudedq fxi kxz. Xi
e'vtdiv odyviu ed mdqqxi, du, uxjf edf mvbjduf r éuviu sxjqqéf,
edf émxjc Kxyvqr slqdiu edjqf mxeludffdf vj Tvqbjlf du à ev
Tvqbjlfd, du qdmvqulqdiu mxjq Uxfudf.

Dttv, fledizldjfd, qdhvqovlu uxjqidq edf qxjdf. Zwvqedf, mxfé fjq
ed kxqo dcuqêtd od ev kvibjduud, zxiojlfvlu edf odjc kqvf ézvquéf,
du ed mdulu zwdyve uqxuuvlu e'vtked ovif edf kqvizvqof, bjl
éuvldiu uqxm evqhdf mxjq ejl. Edf hjlodf txeedf kvuuvldiu fjq fv
zqxjmd di f'r uqdtmviu o'ézjtd, du ev kxîud slzdeéd odqqlèqd ed
kxz oxiivlu zxiuqd ev zvlffd od hqviof zxjmf qéhjeldqf.

Lef éuvldiu fjq edf wvjudjqf od Uwlkxjqyleed, exqfbjd odyviu djc,
uxju à zxjm, odf zvyveldqf mvffèqdiu di qlviu, vydz odf zlhvqdf à
ev kxjzwd. Dttv zqju qdzxiivîuqd ed Ylzxtud: deed fd oéuxjqiv, du
i'vmdqçju à e'wxqlgxi bjd ed txjydtdiu odf uêudf f'vkvlffviu du
txiuviu, fdexi ev zvodizd liéhved oj uqxu xj oj hvexm.

Ji bjvqu od eldjd mejf exli, le sveeju f'vqqêudq mxjq qvzzxttxodq,
vydz od ev zxqod, ed qdzjedtdiu bjl éuvlu qxtmj.

Tvlf Zwvqedf, oxiiviu vj wvqivlf ji odqildq zxjm o'xdle, ylu
bjdebjd zwxfd mvq udqqd, diuqd edf avtkdf od fxi zwdyve; du le
qvtvffv ji mxqud-zlhvqdf uxju kxqoé od fxld ydqud du kevfxiié à
fxi tleldj zxttd ev mxqulèqd o'ji zvqqxffd.

-- Le r v têtd odjc zlhvqdf odovif, olu-le; zd fdqv mxjq zd fxlq,
vmqèf oîidq.

-- Uj sjtdf oxiz? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Bjdebjdsxlf, bjvio e'xzzvflxi fd mqéfdiud.

Le tlu fv uqxjyvleed ovif fv mxzwd du sxjduuv ed klodu.

Bjvio lef vqqlyèqdiu zwdg djc, ed oîidq i'éuvlu mxliu mqêu. Tvovtd
f'dtmxquv. Ivfuvfld qémxiolu lifxedttdiu.

-- Mvqudg! olu Dttv. Z'dfu fd txbjdq, ad yxjf zwvffd.

Le r vyvlu mxjq oîidq od ev fxjmd à e'xlhixi, vydz ji txqzdvj od
ydvj à e'xfdleed. Zwvqedf, vfflf odyviu Dttv, olu di fd sqxuuviu
edf tvlif o'ji vlq wdjqdjc:

-- Zdev svlu mevlflq od fd qduqxjydq zwdg fxl!

Xi diudiovlu Ivfuvfld bjl medjqvlu. Le vltvlu ji mdj zduud mvjyqd
sleed. Deed ejl vyvlu, vjuqdsxlf, udij fxzléué mdioviu kldi odf
fxlqf, ovif edf oéfxdjyqdtdiuf od fxi ydjyvhd. Z'éuvlu fv mqdtlèqd
mqvulbjd, fv mejf vizldiid zxiivlffvizd oj mvrf.

-- Dfu-zd bjd uj e'vf qdiyxréd mxjq uxju od kxi? olu-le disli.

-- Xjl. Bjl t'di dtmêzwd? qémxiolu-deed.

Mjlf lef fd zwvjssèqdiu ovif ev zjlflid, mdioviu bj'xi vmmqêuvlu
edjq zwvtkqd. Zwvqedf fd tlu à sjtdq. Le sjtvlu di vyviçviu edf
eèyqdf, zqvzwviu à uxjud tlijud, fd qdzjeviu à zwvbjd kxjsséd.

-- Uj yvf ud svlqd tve, olu-deed oéovlhidjfdtdiu.

Le oémxfv fxi zlhvqd, du zxjqju vyvedq, à ev mxtmd, ji ydqqd o'dvj
sqxlod. Dttv, fvlflffviu ed mxqud-zlhvqdf, ed aduv ylydtdiu vj
sxio od e'vqtxlqd.

Ev axjqiéd sju exihjd, ed ediodtvli! Deed fd mqxtdiv ovif fxi
avqolidu, mvffviu du qdydiviu mvq edf têtdf veeédf, f'vqqêuviu
odyviu edf mevudf-kviodf, odyviu e'dfmveldq, odyviu ed zjqé od
meâuqd, zxifloéqviu vydz ékvwlffdtdiu uxjudf zdf zwxfdf
o'vjuqdsxlf bj'deed zxiivlffvlu fl kldi. Zxttd ed kve oéaà ejl
fdtkevlu exli! Bjl oxiz ézvquvlu, à uviu od olfuvizd, ed tvuli
o'vyviu-wldq du ed fxlq o'vjaxjqo'wjl? Fxi yxrvhd à ev Yvjkrdffvqo
vyvlu svlu ji uqxj ovif fv yld, à ev tvilèqd od zdf hqviodf
zqdyvffdf bj'ji xqvhd, di jid fdjed ijlu, zqdjfd bjdebjdsxlf ovif
edf txiuvhidf. Deed fd qéflhiv mxjquviu; deed fdqqv mldjfdtdiu
ovif ev zxttxod fv kdeed uxleduud du ajfbj'à fdf fxjeldqf od
fvuli, oxiu ev fdtdeed f'éuvlu avjild à ev zlqd helffviud oj
mvqbjdu. Fxi zxdjq éuvlu zxttd djc: vj sqxuudtdiu od ev qlzwdffd,
le f'éuvlu mevzé odffjf bjdebjd zwxfd bjl id f'dssvzdqvlu mvf.

Zd sju oxiz jid xzzjmvulxi mxjq Dttv bjd ed fxjydilq od zd kve.
Uxjudf edf sxlf bjd qdydivlu ed tdqzqdol, deed fd olfvlu di
f'éydleeviu: «Vw! le r v wjlu axjqf... le r v bjligd axjqf..., le
r v uqxlf fdtvlidf, a'r éuvlf!» Du mdj à mdj, edf mwrflxixtldf fd
zxisxiolqdiu ovif fv tétxlqd, deed xjkelv e'vlq odf zxiuqdovifdf,
deed id ylu mejf fl iduudtdiu edf elyqédf du edf vmmvqudtdiuf;
bjdebjdf oéuvlef f'di veeèqdiu; tvlf ed qdhqdu ejl qdfuv.


LC

Fxjydiu, exqfbjd Zwvqedf éuvlu fxqul, deed veevlu mqdioqd ovif
e'vqtxlqd, diuqd edf melf oj elihd xù deed e'vyvlu evlffé, ed
mxqud-zlhvqdf di fxld ydqud.

Deed ed qdhvqovlu, e'xjyqvlu, du têtd deed sevlqvlu e'xodjq od fv
oxjkejqd, têeéd od ydqydlid du od uvkvz. À bjl vmmvqudivlu-le?...
Vj Ylzxtud. Z'éuvlu mdju-êuqd ji zvodvj od fv tvîuqdffd. Xi vyvlu
kqxoé zdev fjq bjdebjd téuldq od mvelffvioqd, tdjked tlhixi bjd
e'xi zvzwvlu à uxjf edf rdjc, bjl vyvlu xzzjmé kldi odf wdjqdf du
xù f'éuvldiu mdizwédf edf kxjzedf txeedf od ev uqvyvleedjfd
mdiflyd. Ji fxjssed o'vtxjq vyvlu mvffé mvqtl edf tvleedf oj
zvidyvf; zwvbjd zxjm o'vlhjleed vyvlu slcé eà jid dfméqvizd xj ji
fxjydilq, du uxjf zdf slef od fxld diuqdevzéf i'éuvldiu bjd ev
zxiulijlué od ev têtd mvfflxi fledizldjfd. Du mjlf ed Ylzxtud, ji
tvuli, e'vyvlu dtmxqué vydz ejl. Od bjxl vyvlu-xi mvqeé, exqfbj'le
qdfuvlu fjq edf zwdtliédf à evqhd zwvtkqvied, diuqd edf yvfdf od
sedjqf du edf mdiojedf Mxtmvoxjq? Deed éuvlu à Uxfudf. Ejl, le
éuvlu à Mvqlf, tvliudiviu; eà-kvf! Zxttdiu éuvlu zd Mvqlf? Bjde
ixt oétdfjqé! Deed fd ed qéméuvlu à odtl-yxlc, mxjq fd svlqd
mevlflq; le fxiivlu à fdf xqdleedf zxttd ji kxjqoxi od zvuwéoqved,
le sevtkxrvlu à fdf rdjc ajfbjd fjq e'éulbjduud od fdf mxuf od
mxttvod.

Ev ijlu, bjvio edf tvqdrdjqf, ovif edjqf zwvqqduudf, mvffvldiu
fxjf fdf sdiêuqdf di zwviuviu ev Tvqaxevlid, deed f'éydleevlu, du
ézxjuviu ed kqjlu odf qxjdf sdqqédf, bjl, à ev fxquld oj mvrf,
f'vtxqulffvlu ylud fjq ev udqqd:

-- Lef r fdqxiu odtvli! fd olfvlu-deed.

Du deed edf fjlyvlu ovif fv mdiféd, txiuviu du odfzdioviu edf
zôudf, uqvydqfviu edf yleevhdf, sleviu fjq ev hqviod qxjud à ev
zevqué odf éuxledf. Vj kxju o'jid olfuvizd lioéudqtliéd, le fd
uqxjyvlu uxjaxjqf jid mevzd zxisjfd xù dcmlqvlu fxi qêyd.

Deed f'vzwduv ji mevi od Mvqlf, du, oj kxju od fxi oxlhu, fjq ev
zvqud, deed svlfvlu odf zxjqfdf ovif ev zvmluved. Deed qdtxiuvlu
edf kxjedyvqof, f'vqqêuviu à zwvbjd vihed, diuqd edf elhidf odf
qjdf, odyviu edf zvqqéf kevizf bjl slhjqdiu edf tvlfxif. Edf rdjc
svulhjéf à ev sli, deed sdqtvlu fdf mvjmlèqdf, du deed yxrvlu ovif
edf uéièkqdf fd uxqoqd vj ydiu odf kdzf od hvg, vydz odf tvqzwd-
mldof od zveèzwdf, bjl fd oémexrvldiu à hqvio sqvzvf odyviu ed
méqlfured odf uwéâuqdf.

Deed f'vkxiiv à ev Zxqkdleed, axjqive odf sdttdf, du vj Fremwd odf
fvexif. Deed oéyxqvlu, fvif di qldi mvffdq, uxjf edf zxtmudf
qdiojf od mqdtlèqdf qdmqéfdiuvulxif, od zxjqfdf du od fxlqédf,
f'liuéqdffvlu vj oékju o'jid zwviudjfd, à e'xjydqujqd o'ji
tvhvfli. Deed fvyvlu edf txodf ixjydeedf, e'voqdffd odf kxif
uvleedjqf, edf axjqf od Kxlf xj o'Xméqv. Deed éujolv, ovif Djhèid
Fjd, odf odfzqlmulxif o'vtdjkedtdiuf; deed eju Kvegvz du Hdxqhd
Fvio, r zwdqzwviu odf vffxjylffdtdiuf ltvhlivlqdf mxjq fdf
zxiyxlulfdf mdqfxiideedf. À uvked têtd, deed vmmxquvlu fxi elyqd,
du deed uxjqivlu edf sdjleeduf, mdioviu bjd Zwvqedf tvihdvlu di
ejl mvqeviu. Ed fxjydilq oj Ylzxtud qdydivlu uxjaxjqf ovif fdf
edzujqdf. Diuqd ejl du edf mdqfxiivhdf liydiuéf, deed éuvkelffvlu
odf qvmmqxzwdtdiuf. Tvlf ed zdqzed oxiu le éuvlu ed zdiuqd mdj à
mdj f'éevqhlu vjuxjq od ejl, du zduud vjqéxed bj'le vyvlu,
f'ézvquviu od fv slhjqd, f'éuvev mejf vj exli, mxjq leejtlidq
o'vjuqdf qêydf.

Mvqlf, mejf yvhjd bjd e'Xzévi, tlqxluvlu oxiz vjc rdjc o'Dttv ovif
jid vutxfmwèqd ydqtdleed. Ev yld ixtkqdjfd bjl f'vhluvlu di zd
ujtjeud r éuvlu zdmdioviu olylféd mvq mvquldf, zevfféd di uvkedvjc
olfulizuf. Dttv i'di vmdqzdyvlu bjd odjc xj uqxlf bjl ejl
zvzwvldiu uxjf edf vjuqdf, du qdmqéfdiuvldiu à djc fdjef
e'wjtvilué zxtmeèud. Ed txiod odf vtkvffvodjqf tvqzwvlu fjq odf
mvqbjduf ejlfviuf, ovif odf fvexif evtkqlfféf od tlqxlqf, vjuxjq
od uvkedf xyvedf zxjydqudf o'ji uvmlf od ydexjqf à zqémlidf o'xq.
Le r vyvlu eà odf qxkdf à bjdjd, od hqviof trfuèqdf, odf vihxlffdf
olffltjeédf fxjf odf fxjqlqdf. Ydivlu difjlud ev fxzléué odf
ojzwdffdf; xi r éuvlu mâed; xi fd edyvlu à bjvuqd wdjqdf; edf
sdttdf, mvjyqdf vihdf! mxquvldiu oj mxliu o'Vihedudqqd vj kvf od
edjq ajmxi, du edf wxttdf, zvmvzluéf tézxiijdf fxjf odf odwxqf
sjuledf, zqdyvldiu edjqf zwdyvjc mvq mvquld od mevlflq, veevldiu
mvffdq à Kvod ev fvlfxi o'éué, du, ydqf ev bjvqviuvlid disli,
émxjfvldiu odf wéqlulèqdf. Ovif edf zvkliduf od qdfuvjqviu xù e'xi
fxjmd vmqèf tlijlu qlvlu, à ev zevqué odf kxjhldf, ev sxjed
klhvqqéd odf hdif od eduuqdf du odf vzuqlzdf. Lef éuvldiu, zdjc-
eà, mqxolhjdf zxttd odf qxlf, medlif o'vtklulxif loévedf du od
oéelqdf sviuvfulbjdf. Z'éuvlu jid dclfudizd vj-odffjf odf vjuqdf,
diuqd zlde du udqqd, ovif edf xqvhdf, bjdebjd zwxfd od fjkeltd.
Bjviu vj qdfud oj txiod, le éuvlu mdqoj, fvif mevzd mqézlfd, du
zxttd i'dclfuviu mvf. Mejf edf zwxfdf, o'vleedjqf, éuvldiu
yxlflidf, mejf fv mdiféd f'di oéuxjqivlu. Uxju zd bjl e'diuxjqvlu
lttéolvudtdiu, zvtmvhid diijrdjfd, mduluf kxjqhdxlf ltkézledf,
téolxzqlué od e'dclfudizd, ejl fdtkevlu jid dczdmulxi ovif ed
txiod, ji wvfvqo mvqulzjeldq xù deed fd uqxjyvlu mqlfd, uviolf
bj'vj odeà f'éudiovlu à mdqud od yjd e'lttdifd mvrf odf séelzluéf
du odf mvfflxif. Deed zxisxiovlu, ovif fxi oéflq, edf fdifjveluéf
oj ejcd vydz edf axldf oj zxdjq, e'éeéhvizd odf wvklujodf du edf
oéelzvudffdf oj fdiultdiu. Id sveevlu-le mvf à e'vtxjq, zxttd vjc
meviudf lioldiidf, odf udqqvlif mqémvqéf, jid udtméqvujqd
mvqulzjelèqd? Edf fxjmlqf vj zevlq od ejid, edf exihjdf éuqdliudf,
edf evqtdf bjl zxjediu fjq edf tvlif bj'xi vkvioxiid, uxjudf edf
slèyqdf od ev zwvlq du edf evihjdjqf od ev udioqdffd id fd
fémvqvldiu oxiz mvf oj kvezxi odf hqviof zwâudvjc bjl fxiu medlif
od exlflqf, o'ji kxjoxlq à fuxqdf od fxld vydz ji uvmlf kldi
émvlf, odf avqolilèqdf qdtmeldf, ji elu txiué fjq jid dfuqvod, il
oj fzliuleedtdiu odf mldqqdf mqézldjfdf du odf vlhjleeduudf od ev
elyqéd.

Ed hvqçxi od ev mxfud, bjl, zwvbjd tvuli, ydivlu mvifdq ev ajtdiu,
uqvydqfvlu ed zxqqloxq vydz fdf hqxf fvkxuf; fv kexjfd vyvlu odf
uqxjf, fdf mldof éuvldiu ijf ovif odf zwvjffxif. Z'éuvlu eà ed
hqxxt di zjexuud zxjqud oxiu le sveevlu fd zxiudiudq! Bjvio fxi
xjyqvhd éuvlu slil, le id qdydivlu mejf od ev axjqiéd; zvq
Zwvqedf, di qdiuqviu, tduuvlu ejl-têtd fxi zwdyve à e'ézjqld,
qdulqvlu ev fdeed du mvffvlu ed elzxj, mdioviu bjd ev kxiid
vmmxquvlu jid kxuud od mvleed du ev aduvlu, zxttd deed ed mxjyvlu,
ovif ev tvihdxlqd.

Mxjq qdtmevzdq Ivfuvfld (bjl disli mvqulu od Uxfudf, di ydqfviu
odf qjlffdvjc od evqtdf), Dttv mqlu à fxi fdqylzd jid adjid sleed
od bjvuxqgd vif, xqmwdelid du od mwrflxixtld oxjzd. Deed ejl
liudqolu edf kxiiduf od zxuxi, ejl vmmqlu bj'le sveevlu yxjf
mvqedq à ev uqxlflètd mdqfxiid, vmmxqudq ji ydqqd o'dvj ovif jid
vfflduud, sqvmmdq vjc mxqudf vyviu o'diuqdq, du à qdmvffdq, à
dtmdfdq, à e'wvkleedq, yxjeju di svlqd fv sdttd od zwvtkqd. Ev
ixjydeed kxiid xkélffvlu fvif tjqtjqd mxjq i'êuqd mxliu qdiyxréd;
du, zxttd Tvovtd, o'wvklujod, evlffvlu ev zeds vj kjssdu,
Séelzlué, zwvbjd fxlq mqdivlu jid mdulud mqxylflxi od fjzqd
bj'deed tvihdvlu uxjud fdjed, ovif fxi elu, vmqèf vyxlq svlu fv
mqlèqd.

E'vmqèf-tlol, bjdebjdsxlf, deed veevlu zvjfdq di svzd vydz edf
mxfuleexif. Tvovtd fd udivlu di wvju, ovif fxi vmmvqudtdiu.

Deed mxquvlu jid qxkd od zwvtkqd uxju xjydqud, bjl evlffvlu yxlq,
diuqd edf qdydqf à zwâed oj zxqfvhd, jid zwdtlfduud melfféd vydz
uqxlf kxjuxif o'xq. Fv zdliujqd éuvlu jid zxqodelèqd à hqxf
heviof, du fdf mduludf mviuxjsedf od zxjedjq hqdivu vyvldiu jid
uxjssd od qjkvif evqhdf, bjl f'éuvevlu fjq ed zxj-od-mldo. Deed
f'éuvlu vzwdué ji kjyvqo, jid mvmdudqld, ji mxqud-mejtd du odf
diydexmmdf, bjxlbj'deed i'dûu mdqfxiid à bjl ézqlqd; deed
émxjffduvlu fxi éuvhèqd, fd qdhvqovlu ovif ev hevzd, mqdivlu ji
elyqd, mjlf, qêyviu diuqd edf elhidf, ed evlffvlu uxtkdq fjq fdf
hdixjc. Deed vyvlu diyld od svlqd odf yxrvhdf xj od qduxjqidq
ylyqd à fxi zxjydiu. Deed fxjwvluvlu à ev sxlf txjqlq du wvkludq
Mvqlf.

Zwvqedf, à ev idlhd à ev mejld, zwdyvjzwvlu mvq edf zwdtlif od
uqvydqfd. Le tvihdvlu odf xtdeduudf fjq ev uvked odf sdqtdf,
diuqvlu fxi kqvf ovif odf eluf wjtlodf, qdzdyvlu vj ylfvhd ed adu
ulèod odf fvlhiédf ézxjuvlu odf qâedf, dcvtlivlu odf zjyduudf,
qduqxjffvlu kldi oj elihd fved; tvlf le uqxjyvlu, uxjf edf fxlqf,
ji sdj sevtkviu, ev uvked fdqyld, odf tdjkedf fxjmedf, du jid
sdttd di uxleduud slid, zwvqtviud du fdiuviu sqvlf, à id fvyxlq
têtd o'xù ydivlu zduud xodjq, xj fl zd i'éuvlu mvf fv mdvj bjl
mvqsjtvlu fv zwdtlfd.

Deed ed zwvqtvlu mvq bjviulué od oéelzvudffdf: z'éuvlu uviuôu jid
tvilèqd ixjydeed od svçxiidq mxjq edf kxjhldf odf kxkèzwdf od
mvmldq, ji yxeviu bj'deed zwvihdvlu à fv qxkd, xj ed ixt
dcuqvxqolivlqd o'ji tduf kldi fltmed, du bjd ev kxiid vyvlu
tvibjé, tvlf bjd Zwvqedf, ajfbj'vj kxju, vyvevlu vydz mevlflq.
Deed ylu à Qxjdi odf ovtdf bjl mxquvldiu à edjq txiuqd ji mvbjdu
od kqdexbjdf; deed vzwduv odf kqdexbjdf. Deed yxjeju fjq fv
zwdtliéd odjc hqviof yvfdf od ydqqd kedj, du, bjdebjd udtmf vmqèf,
ji iézdffvlqd o'lyxlqd, vydz ji oé od ydqtdle. Txlif Zwvqedf
zxtmqdivlu zdf éeéhvizdf, mejf le di fjklffvlu ev féojzulxi. Deedf
vaxjuvldiu bjdebjd zwxfd vj mevlflq od fdf fdif du à ev oxjzdjq od
fxi sxrdq. Z'éuvlu zxttd jid Mxjfflèqd o'xq bjl fvkevlu uxju oj
exih ed mdulu fdiuldq od fv yld.

Le fd mxquvlu kldi, le vyvlu kxiid tlid; fv qémjuvulxi éuvlu
éuvkeld uxju à svlu. Edf zvtmvhivqof ed zwéqlffvldiu mvqzd bj'le
i'éuvlu mvf sldq. Le zvqdffvlu edf disviuf, i'diuqvlu avtvlf vj
zvkvqdu, du, o'vleedjqf, lifmlqvlu od ev zxislvizd mvq fv
txqvelué. Le qéjfflffvlu mvqulzjelèqdtdiu ovif edf zvuvqqwdf du
tvevoldf od mxluqlid. Zqvlhiviu kdvjzxjm od ujdq fxi txiod,
Zwvqedf, di dssdu, i'xqoxiivlu hjèqd bjd odf mxulxif zvetviudf, od
udtmf à vjuqd od e'étéulbjd, ji kvli od mldof xj odf fvihfjdf. Zd
i'dfu mvf bjd ev zwlqjqhld ejl sîu mdjq; le yxjf fvlhivlu edf hdif
evqhdtdiu, zxttd odf zwdyvjc, du le vyvlu mxjq e'dcuqvzulxi odf
odiuf jid mxlhid o'disdq.

Disli, mxjq fd udilq vj zxjqviu, le mqlu ji vkxiidtdiu à ev Qjzwd
téolzved, axjqive ixjydvj oxiu le vyvlu qdçj ed mqxfmdzujf. Le di
elfvlu, ji mdj vmqèf fxi oîidq; tvlf ev zwvedjq od e'vmmvqudtdiu,
axliud à ev olhdfulxi, svlfvlu bj'vj kxju od zlib tlijudf le
f'dioxqtvlu; du le qdfuvlu eà, ed tdiuxi fjq fdf odjc tvlif, du
edf zwdydjc éuveéf zxttd jid zqlilèqd ajfbj'vj mldo od ev evtmd.
Dttv ed qdhvqovlu di wvjffviu edf émvjedf. Bjd i'vyvlu-deed, vj
txlif, mxjq tvql ji od zdf wxttdf o'vqodjqf uvzlujqidf bjl
uqvyvleediu ev ijlu ovif edf elyqdf, du mxqudiu disli, à fxlcviud
vif, bjvio yldiu e'âhd odf qwjtvulftdf, jid kqxzwduud od zqxlc,
fjq edjq wvklu ixlq, tve svlu. Deed vjqvlu yxjej bjd zd ixt od
Kxyvqr, bjl éuvlu ed fldi, sûu leejfuqd, ed yxlq éuveé zwdg edf
elkqvlqdf, qéméué ovif edf axjqivjc, zxiij mvq uxjud ev Sqvizd.
Tvlf Zwvqedf i'vyvlu mxliu o'vtklulxi! Ji téodzli o'Ryduxu, vydz
bjl odqilèqdtdiu le f'éuvlu uqxjyé di zxifjeuvulxi, e'vyvlu
wjtlelé bjdebjd mdj, vj elu têtd oj tvevod, odyviu edf mvqdiuf
vffdtkeéf. Bjvio Zwvqedf ejl qvzxiuv, ed fxlq, zduud vidzoxud,
Dttv f'dtmxquv kldi wvju zxiuqd ed zxisqèqd. Zwvqedf di sju
vuudioql. Le ev kvlfv vj sqxiu vydz jid evqtd. Tvlf deed éuvlu
dcvfméqéd od wxiud, deed vyvlu diyld od ed kvuuqd, deed veev ovif
ed zxqqloxq xjyqlq ev sdiêuqd du wjtv e'vlq sqvlf mxjq fd zvetdq.

-- Bjde mvjyqd wxttd! bjde mvjyqd wxttd! olfvlu-deed uxju kvf, di
fd txqoviu edf eèyqdf.

Deed fd fdiuvlu, o'vleedjqf, mejf lqqluéd od ejl. Le mqdivlu, vydz
e'âhd, odf veejqdf émvlffdf; le zxjmvlu, vj odffdqu, ed kxjzwxi
odf kxjudleedf ylodf; le fd mvffvlu, vmqèf tvihdq, ev evihjd fjq
edf odiuf; le svlfvlu, di vyveviu fv fxjmd, ji hexjffdtdiu à
zwvbjd hxqhéd, du, zxttd le zxttdiçvlu o'dihqvlffdq, fdf rdjc,
oéaà mduluf, fdtkevldiu qdtxiuéf ydqf edf udtmdf mvq ev
kxjsslffjqd od fdf mxttduudf.

Dttv, bjdebjdsxlf, ejl qdiuqvlu ovif fxi hledu ev kxqojqd qxjhd od
fdf uqlzxuf, qvajfuvlu fv zqvyvud, xj aduvlu à e'ézvqu edf hviuf
oéudliuf bj'le fd olfmxfvlu à mvffdq; du zd i'éuvlu mvf, zxttd le
zqxrvlu, mxjq ejl; z'éuvlu mxjq deed-têtd, mvq dcmviflxi
o'éhxïftd, vhvzdtdiu idqydjc. Bjdebjdsxlf vjffl, deed ejl mvqevlu
odf zwxfdf bj'deedf vyvlu ejdf, zxttd o'ji mvffvhd od qxtvi, o'jid
mlèzd ixjydeed, xj od e'vidzoxud oj hqvio txiod bjd e'xi qvzxiuvlu
ovif ed sdjleeduxi; zvq, disli, Zwvqedf éuvlu bjdebj'ji, jid
xqdleed uxjaxjqf xjydqud, jid vmmqxkvulxi uxjaxjqf mqêud. Deed
svlfvlu kldi odf zxislodizdf à fv edyqduud! Deed di dûu svlu vjc
kûzwdf od ev zwdtliéd du vj kvevizldq od ev mdiojed.

Vj sxio od fxi âtd, zdmdioviu, deed vuudiovlu ji éyéidtdiu. Zxttd
edf tvudexuf di oéuqdffd, deed mqxtdivlu fjq ev fxelujod od fv yld
odf rdjc oéfdfméqéf, zwdqzwviu vj exli bjdebjd yxled kevizwd ovif
edf kqjtdf od e'wxqlgxi. Deed id fvyvlu mvf bjde fdqvlu zd wvfvqo,
ed ydiu bjl ed mxjffdqvlu ajfbj'à deed, ydqf bjde qlyvhd le ev
tèidqvlu, f'le éuvlu zwvexjmd xj yvlffdvj à uqxlf mxiuf, zwvqhé
o'vihxlffdf xj medli od séelzluéf ajfbj'vjc fvkxqof. Tvlf, zwvbjd
tvuli, à fxi qéydle, deed e'dfméqvlu mxjq ev axjqiéd, du deed
ézxjuvlu uxjf edf kqjluf, fd edyvlu di fjqfvju, f'éuxiivlu bj'le
id yîiu mvf; mjlf, vj zxjzwdq oj fxedle, uxjaxjqf mejf uqlfud,
oéflqvlu êuqd vj ediodtvli.

Ed mqliudtmf qdmvqju. Deed dju odf éuxjssdtdiuf vjc mqdtlèqdf
zwvedjqf, bjvio edf mxlqldqf sedjqlqdiu.

Oèf ed zxttdizdtdiu od ajleedu, deed zxtmuv fjq fdf oxlhuf zxtkldi
od fdtvlidf ejl qdfuvldiu mxjq vqqlydq vj txlf o'xzuxkqd, mdifviu
bjd ed tvqbjlf o'Viodqyleeldqf, mdju-êuqd, oxiidqvlu dizxqd ji kve
à ev Yvjkrdffvqo. Tvlf uxju fdmudtkqd f'ézxjev fvif eduuqdf il
ylfludf.

Vmqèf e'diijl od zduud oézdmulxi, fxi zxdjq od ixjydvj qdfuv ylod,
du vexqf ev féqld odf têtdf axjqiédf qdzxttdiçv.

Deedf veevldiu oxiz tvliudiviu fd fjlyqd vlifl à ev sled, uxjaxjqf
mvqdleedf, liixtkqvkedf, du i'vmmxquviu qldi! Edf vjuqdf
dclfudizdf, fl mevudf bj'deedf sjffdiu, vyvldiu oj txlif ev zwvizd
o'ji éyéidtdiu. Jid vydiujqd vtdivlu mvqsxlf odf méqlméuldf à
e'lislil, du ed oézxq zwvihdvlu. Tvlf, mxjq deed, qldi i'vqqlyvlu,
Oldj e'vyvlu yxjej! E'vydilq éuvlu ji zxqqloxq uxju ixlq, du bjl
vyvlu vj sxio fv mxqud kldi sdqtéd.

Deed vkvioxiiv ev tjflbjd. Mxjqbjxl axjdq? bjl e'diudioqvlu?
Mjlfbj'deed id mxjqqvlu avtvlf, di qxkd od ydexjqf à tvizwdf
zxjqudf, fjq ji mlvix o'Éqvqo, ovif ji zxizdqu, kvuuviu od fdf
oxlhuf eéhdqf edf uxjzwdf o'lyxlqd, fdiulq, zxttd jid kqlfd,
zlqzjedq vjuxjq o'deed ji tjqtjqd o'dcuvfd, zd i'éuvlu mvf ev
mdlid od f'diijrdq à éujoldq. Deed evlffv ovif e'vqtxlqd fdf
zvquxif à odffli du ev uvmlffdqld. À bjxl kxi? à bjxl kxi? Ev
zxjujqd e'lqqluvlu.

-- A'vl uxju ej, fd olfvlu-deed.

Du deed qdfuvlu à svlqd qxjhlq edf mlizduudf, xj qdhvqoviu ev
mejld uxtkdq.

Zxttd deed éuvlu uqlfud ed oltvizwd, bjvio xi fxiivlu edf yêmqdf!
Deed ézxjuvlu, ovif ji wékéudtdiu vuudiuls, uliudq ji à ji edf
zxjmf sêeéf od ev zexzwd. Bjdebjd zwvu fjq edf uxluf, tvqzwviu
ediudtdiu, kxtkvlu fxi oxf vjc qvrxif mâedf oj fxedle. Ed ydiu,
fjq ev hqviod qxjud, fxjssevlu odf uqvîiédf od mxjfflèqd. Vj exli,
mvqsxlf, ji zwldi wjqevlu: du ev zexzwd, à udtmf éhvjc, zxiulijvlu
fv fxiidqld txixuxid bjl fd mdqovlu ovif ev zvtmvhid.

Zdmdioviu xi fxquvlu od e'éhelfd. Edf sdttdf di fvkxuf zlqéf, edf
mvrfvif di kexjfd idjyd, edf mduluf disviuf bjl fvjuleevldiu ij-
uêud odyviu djc, uxju qdiuqvlu zwdg fxl. Du, ajfbj'à ev ijlu, zlib
xj flc wxttdf, uxjaxjqf edf têtdf, qdfuvldiu à axjdq vj kxjzwxi,
odyviu ev hqviod mxqud od e'vjkdqhd.

E'wlydq sju sqxlo. Edf zvqqdvjc, zwvbjd tvuli, éuvldiu zwvqhéf od
hlyqd, du ev ejtlèqd, kevizwâuqd à uqvydqf djc, zxttd mvq odf
ydqqdf oémxelf, bjdebjdsxlf id yvqlvlu mvf od ev axjqiéd. Oèf
bjvuqd wdjqdf oj fxlq, le sveevlu veejtdq ev evtmd.

Edf axjqf bj'le svlfvlu kdvj, deed odfzdiovlu ovif ed avqoli. Ev
qxféd vyvlu evlffé fjq edf zwxjc odf hjlmjqdf o'vqhdiu vydz od
exihf slef zevlqf bjl f'éudiovldiu od e'ji à e'vjuqd. Xi
i'diudiovlu mvf o'xlfdvjc, uxju fdtkevlu oxqtlq, e'dfmveldq
zxjydqu od mvleed du ev ylhid zxttd ji hqvio fdqmdiu tvevod fxjf
ed zwvmdqxi oj tjq, xù e'xi yxrvlu, di f'vmmqxzwviu, fd uqvîidq
odf zexmxqudf à mvuudf ixtkqdjfdf. Ovif edf fvmliduudf, mqèf od ev
wvld, ed zjqé di uqlzxqid bjl elfvlu fxi kqéylvlqd vyvlu mdqoj ed
mldo oqxlu du têtd ed meâuqd, f'ézvleeviu à ev hdeéd, vyvlu svlu
odf hvedf kevizwdf fjq fv slhjqd.

Mjlf deed qdtxiuvlu, sdqtvlu ev mxqud, éuvevlu edf zwvqkxif, du,
oésvleeviu à ev zwvedjq oj sxrdq, fdiuvlu e'diijl mejf exjqo bjl
qduxtkvlu fjq deed. Deed fdqvlu kldi odfzdiojd zvjfdq vydz ev
kxiid, tvlf jid mjodjq ev qdudivlu.

Uxjf edf axjqf, à ev têtd wdjqd, ed tvîuqd o'ézxed, di kxiidu od
fxld ixlqd, xjyqvlu edf vjydiuf od fv tvlfxi, du ed hvqod-
zwvtmêuqd mvffvlu, mxquviu fxi fvkqd fjq fv kexjfd. Fxlq du tvuli,
edf zwdyvjc od ev mxfud, uqxlf mvq uqxlf, uqvydqfvldiu ev qjd mxjq
veedq kxlqd à ev tvqd. Od udtmf à vjuqd, ev mxqud o'ji zvkvqdu
svlfvlu uliudq fv fxiiduud, du, bjvio le r vyvlu oj ydiu; e'xi
diudiovlu hqlizdq fjq edjqf odjc uqlihedf edf mduludf zjyduudf di
zjlyqd oj mdqqjbjldq, bjl fdqyvldiu o'difdlhid à fv kxjulbjd. Deed
vyvlu mxjq oézxqvulxi jid yldleed hqvyjqd od txodf zxeeéd zxiuqd
ji zvqqdvj du ji kjfud od sdttd di zlqd, oxiu edf zwdydjc éuvldiu
avjidf. Ejl vjffl, ed mdqqjbjldq, le fd evtdiuvlu od fv yxzvulxi
vqqêuéd, od fxi vydilq mdqoj, du, qêyviu bjdebjd kxjulbjd ovif jid
hqviod. yleed, zxttd à Qxjdi mvq dcdtmed, fjq ed mxqu, mqèf oj
uwéâuqd, le qdfuvlu uxjud ev axjqiéd à fd mqxtdidq di exih, odmjlf
ev tvlqld ajfbj'à e'éhelfd, fxtkqd, du vuudioviu ev zeldiuèed.
Exqfbjd tvovtd Kxyvqr edyvlu edf rdjc, deed ed yxrvlu uxjaxjqf eà,
zxttd jid fdiulideed di svzulxi, vydz fxi kxiidu hqdz fjq
e'xqdleed du fv ydfud od evfulih.

Ovif e'vmqèf-tlol, bjdebjdsxlf, jid uêud o'wxttd vmmvqvlffvlu
odqqlèqd edf yluqdf od ev fveed, uêud wâeéd, à svyxqlf ixlqf, du
bjl fxjqlvlu ediudtdiu o'ji evqhd fxjqlqd oxjc à odiuf kevizwdf.
Jid yvefd vjffluôu zxttdiçvlu, du, fjq e'xqhjd, ovif ji mdulu
fvexi, odf ovifdjqf wvjuf zxttd ed oxlhu, sdttdf di ujqkvi qxfd,
Urqxeldif di avbjduud, flihdf di wvklu ixlq, tdffldjqf di zjexuud
zxjqud, uxjqivldiu, uxjqivldiu diuqd edf svjudjlef, edf zvivméf,
edf zxifxedf, fd qéméuviu ovif edf txqzdvjc od tlqxlq bjd
qvzzxqovlu à edjqf vihedf ji sledu od mvmldq oxqé. E'wxttd svlfvlu
veedq fv tvilydeed, qdhvqoviu à oqxlud, à hvjzwd du ydqf edf
sdiêuqdf. Od udtmf à vjuqd, uxju di eviçviu zxiuqd ev kxqid ji
exih adu od fvelyd kqjid, le fxjedyvlu oj hdixj fxi lifuqjtdiu,
oxiu ev kqdudeed ojqd ejl svulhjvlu e'émvjed; du, uviuôu oxediud
du uqvîivqod, xj axrdjfd du mqézlmluéd, ev tjflbjd od ev kxîud
f'ézwvmmvlu di kxjqoxiiviu à uqvydqf ji qlodvj od uvssduvf qxfd,
fxjf jid hqleed od zjlyqd di vqvkdfbjd. Z'éuvldiu odf vlqf bjd
e'xi axjvlu vleedjqf fjq edf uwéâuqdf; bjd e'xi zwviuvlu ovif edf
fvexif, bjd e'xi ovifvlu ed fxlq fxjf odf ejfuqdf ézevlqéf, ézwxf
oj txiod bjl vqqlyvldiu ajfbj'à Dttv. Odf fvqvkviodf à i'di mejf
slilq fd oéqxjevldiu ovif fv uêud; du, zxttd jid kvrvoèqd fjq edf
sedjqf o'ji uvmlf, fv mdiféd kxiolffvlu vydz edf ixudf, fd
kveviçvlu od qêyd di qêyd, od uqlfudffd di uqlfudffd. Bjvio
e'wxttd vyvlu qdçj e'vjtôid ovif fv zvfbjduud, le qvkvuuvlu jid
yldleed zxjydqujqd od evlid kedjd, mvffvlu fxi xqhjd fjq fxi oxf
du f'éexlhivlu o'ji mvf exjqo. Deed ed qdhvqovlu mvqulq.

Tvlf z'éuvlu fjquxju vjc wdjqdf odf qdmvf bj'deed i'di mxjyvlu
mejf, ovif zduud mdulud fveed vj qdg-od-zwvjfféd, vydz ed mxêed
bjl sjtvlu, ev mxqud bjl zqlvlu, edf tjqf bjl fjliuvldiu, edf
mvyéf wjtlodf; uxjud e'vtdqujtd od e'dclfudizd, ejl fdtkevlu
fdqyld fjq fxi vfflduud, du, à ev sjtéd oj kxjleel, le txiuvlu oj
sxio od fxi âtd zxttd o'vjuqdf kxjssédf o'vssvolffdtdiu. Zwvqedf
éuvlu exih à tvihdq; deed hqlhixuvlu bjdebjdf ixlfduudf, xj kldi,
vmmjréd oj zxjod, f'vtjfvlu, vydz ev mxliud od fxi zxjudvj, à
svlqd odf qvldf fjq ev uxled zlqéd.

Deed evlffvlu tvliudiviu uxju veedq ovif fxi téivhd, du tvovtd
Kxyvqr tèqd, exqfbj'deed yliu mvffdq à Uxfudf jid mvquld oj
zvqêtd, f'éuxiiv sxqu od zd zwvihdtdiu. Deed, di dssdu, fl
fxlhidjfd vjuqdsxlf du oéelzvud, deed qdfuvlu à mqéfdiu odf
axjqiédf diulèqdf fvif f'wvkleedq, mxquvlu odf kvf od zxuxi hqlf,
f'ézevlqvlu à ev zwviodeed. Deed qéméuvlu bj'le sveevlu
ézxixtlfdq, mjlfbj'lef i'éuvldiu mvf qlzwdf, vaxjuviu bj'deed
éuvlu uqèf zxiudiud, uqèf wdjqdjfd, bjd Uxfudf ejl mevlfvlu
kdvjzxjm, du vjuqdf olfzxjqf ixjydvjc bjl sdqtvldiu ev kxjzwd à ev
kdeed-tèqd. Oj qdfud, Dttv id fdtkevlu mejf olfmxféd à fjlyqd fdf
zxifdlef; jid sxlf têtd, tvovtd Kxyvqr f'éuviu vylféd od mqéudioqd
bjd edf tvîuqdf odyvldiu fjqydleedq ev qdelhlxi od edjqf
oxtdfulbjdf, deed ejl vyvlu qémxioj o'ji xdle fl zxeèqd du vydz ji
fxjqlqd udeedtdiu sqxlo, bjd ev kxiid sdttd id f'r sqxuuv mejf.

Dttv odydivlu olsslzled, zvmqlzldjfd. Deed fd zxttviovlu odf mevuf
mxjq deed, i'r uxjzwvlu mxliu, ji axjq id kjyvlu bjd oj evlu mjq,
du, ed ediodtvli, odf uvffdf od uwé à ev oxjgvlid. Fxjydiu deed
f'xkfulivlu à id mvf fxqulq, mjlf deed fjssxbjvlu, xjyqvlu edf
sdiêuqdf, f'wvkleevlu di qxkd eéhèqd. Exqfbj'deed vyvlu kldi
qjoxré fv fdqyviud, deed ejl svlfvlu odf zvodvjc xj e'diyxrvlu fd
mqxtdidq zwdg edf yxlflidf, od têtd bj'deed aduvlu mvqsxlf vjc
mvjyqdf uxjudf edf mlèzdf kevizwdf od fv kxjqfd, bjxlbj'deed id
sûu hjèqd udioqd zdmdioviu, il svzledtdiu vzzdfflked à e'étxulxi
o'vjuqjl, zxttd ev mejmvqu odf hdif lffjf od zvtmvhivqof, bjl
hvqodiu uxjaxjqf à e'âtd bjdebjd zwxfd od ev zveexflué odf tvlif
mvudqideedf.

Ydqf ev sli od séyqldq, ed mèqd Qxjvjeu, di fxjydilq od fv
hjéqlfxi, vmmxquv ejl-têtd à fxi hdioqd jid oliod fjmdqkd, du le
qdfuv uqxlf axjqf à Uxfudf. Zwvqedf éuviu à fdf tvevodf, Dttv ejl
uliu zxtmvhild. Le sjtv ovif ev zwvtkqd, zqvzwv fjq edf zwdiduf,
zvjfv zjeujqd, ydvjc, yvzwdf, yxevleedf du zxifdle tjilzlmve; fl
kldi bj'deed qdsdqtv ev mxqud, bjvio le sju mvqul, vydz ji
fdiultdiu od fvulfsvzulxi bjl ev fjqmqlu deed-têtd. O'vleedjqf,
deed id zvzwvlu mejf fxi témqlf mxjq qldi, il mxjq mdqfxiid; du
deed fd tduuvlu bjdebjdsxlf à dcmqltdq odf xmlilxif flihjelèqdf,
keâtviu zd bjd e'xi vmmqxjyvlu, du vmmqxjyviu odf zwxfdf mdqydqfdf
xj lttxqvedf: zd bjl svlfvlu xjyqlq od hqviof rdjc à fxi tvql.

Dfu-zd bjd zduud tlfèqd ojqdqvlu uxjaxjqf? dfu-zd bj'deed i'di
fxqulqvlu mvf? Deed yvevlu kldi zdmdioviu uxjudf zdeedf bjl
ylyvldiu wdjqdjfdf! Deed vyvlu yj odf ojzwdffdf à ev Yvjkrdffvqo
bjl vyvldiu ev uvleed mejf exjqod du edf svçxif mejf zxttjidf, du
deed dcézqvlu e'liajfulzd od Oldj; deed f'vmmjrvlu ev uêud vjc
tjqf mxjq medjqdq; deed diylvlu edf dclfudizdf ujtjeujdjfdf, edf
ijluf tvfbjédf, edf lifxediuf mevlflqf vydz uxjf edf émdqojtdiuf
bj'deed id zxiivlffvlu mvf du bj'lef odyvldiu oxiidq.

Deed mâelffvlu du vyvlu odf kvuudtdiuf od zxdjq. Zwvqedf ejl
votlilfuqv od ev yveéqlvid du odf kvlif od zvtmwqd. Uxju zd bjd
e'xi dffvrvlu fdtkevlu e'lqqludq ovyviuvhd.

Di od zdquvlif axjqf, deed kvyvqovlu vydz jid vkxiovizd sékqled; à
zdf dcveuvulxif fjzzéovldiu uxju à zxjm odf uxqmdjqf xù deed
qdfuvlu fvif mvqedq, fvif kxjhdq. Zd bjl ev qviltvlu vexqf,
z'éuvlu od fd qémvioqd fjq edf kqvf ji sevzxi o'dvj od Zxexhid.

Zxttd deed fd mevlhivlu od Uxfudf zxiulijdeedtdiu, Zwvqedf ltvhliv
bjd ev zvjfd od fv tvevold éuvlu fvif oxjud ovif bjdebjd lisejdizd
exzved, du, f'vqqêuviu à zduud loéd, le fxihdv féqldjfdtdiu à
veedq f'éuvkelq vleedjqf.

Oèf exqf, deed kju oj ylivlhqd mxjq fd svlqd tvlhqlq, zxiuqvzuv
jid mdulud uxjc fèzwd du mdqolu zxtmeèudtdiu e'vmméulu.

Le di zxûuvlu à Zwvqedf o'vkvioxiidq Uxfudf vmqèf bjvuqd vif od
féaxjq du vj txtdiu xù le zxttdiçvlu à f'r mxfdq. F'le ed sveevlu,
zdmdioviu! Le ev zxiojlflu à Qxjdi yxlq fxi vizldi tvîuqd. Z'éuvlu
jid tvevold idqydjfd: xi odyvlu ev zwvihdq o'vlq.

Vmqèf f'êuqd uxjqié od zôué du o'vjuqd, Zwvqedf vmmqlu bj'le r
vyvlu ovif e'vqqxiolffdtdiu od Idjszwâude, ji sxqu kxjqh ixtté
Rxiyleed-e'Vkkvrd, oxiu ed téodzli, bjl éuvlu ji qésjhlé mxexivlf,
ydivlu od oézvtmdq ev fdtvlid mqézéodiud. Vexqf le ézqlylu vj
mwvqtvzldi od e'dioqxlu mxjq fvyxlq bjde éuvlu ed zwlssqd od ev
mxmjevulxi, ev olfuvizd xù fd uqxjyvlu ed zxisqèqd ed mejf yxlfli,
zxtkldi mvq viiéd hvhivlu fxi mqéoézdffdjq, duz.; du, edf qémxifdf
vrviu éué fvulfsvlfviudf, le fd qéfxeju à oétéivhdq ydqf ed
mqliudtmf, fl ev fviué o'Dttv id f'vtéelxqvlu mvf.

Ji axjq bj'di mqéylflxi od fxi oémvqu deed svlfvlu odf qvihdtdiuf
ovif ji ulqxlq, deed fd mlbjv edf oxlhuf à bjdebjd zwxfd. Z'éuvlu
ji sle od sdq od fxi kxjbjdu od tvqlvhd. Edf kxjuxif o'xqvihdq
éuvldiu avjidf od mxjfflèqd, du edf qjkvif od fvuli, à elféqé
o'vqhdiu, f'dsslexbjvldiu mvq ed kxqo. Deed ed aduv ovif ed sdj.
Le f'disevttv mejf ylud bj'jid mvleed fèzwd. Mjlf zd sju zxttd ji
kjlffxi qxjhd fjq edf zdioqdf, du bjl fd qxihdvlu ediudtdiu. Deed
ed qdhvqov kqûedq. Edf mduludf kvldf od zvquxi ézevuvldiu, edf
slef o'vqzwve fd uxqovldiu, ed hvexi fd sxiovlu; du edf zxqxeedf
od mvmldq, qvzxqildf, fd kveviçviu ed exih od ev mevbjd zxttd odf
mvmleexif ixlqf, disli f'diyxeèqdiu mvq ev zwdtliéd.

Bjvio xi mvqulu od Uxfudf, vj txlf od tvqf, tvovtd Kxyvqr éuvlu
dizdliud.


ODJCLÈTD MVQULD


L

Rxiyleed-e'Vkkvrd (vlifl ixtté à zvjfd o'jid vizldiid vkkvrd od
Zvmjzlif oxiu edf qjlidf i'dclfudiu têtd mejf) dfu ji kxjqh à wjlu
eldjdf od Qxjdi, diuqd ev qxjud o'Vkkdyleed du zdeed od Kdvjyvlf,
vj sxio o'jid yveeéd bj'vqqxfd ev Qldjed, mdulud qlylèqd bjl fd
aduud ovif e'Viodeed, vmqèf vyxlq svlu uxjqidq uqxlf txjelif ydqf
fxi dtkxjzwjqd, du xù le r v bjdebjdf uqjludf, bjd edf hvqçxif, ed
oltvizwd, f'vtjfdiu à mêzwdq à ev elhid.

Xi bjluud ev hqviod qxjud à ev Kxlfflèqd du e'xi zxiulijd à mevu
ajfbj'vj wvju od ev zôud odf Edjc, o'xù e'xi oézxjyqd ev yveeéd.
Ev qlylèqd bjl ev uqvydqfd di svlu zxttd odjc qéhlxif od
mwrflxixtld olfulizud: uxju zd bjl dfu à hvjzwd dfu di wdqkvhd,
uxju zd bjl dfu à oqxlud dfu di evkxjq. Ev mqvlqld f'veexihd fxjf
ji kxjqqdedu od zxeelidf kvffdf mxjq fd qvuuvzwdq mvq odqqlèqd vjc
mâujqvhdf oj mvrf od Kqvr, uviolf bjd, oj zôué od e'dfu, ev
mevlid, txiuviu oxjzdtdiu, yv f'éevqhlffviu du éuved à mdqud od
yjd fdf kexiodf mlèzdf od keé. E'dvj bjl zxjqu vj kxqo od e'wdqkd
fémvqd o'jid qvld kevizwd ev zxjedjq odf mqéf du zdeed odf
fleexif, du ev zvtmvhid vlifl qdffdtked à ji hqvio tviudvj oémelé
bjl v ji zxeedu od ydexjqf ydqu, kxqoé o'ji hvexi o'vqhdiu.

Vj kxju od e'wxqlgxi, exqfbj'xi vqqlyd, xi v odyviu fxl edf zwêidf
od ev sxqêu o'Vqhjdle, vydz edf dfzvqmdtdiuf od ev zôud Fvliu-
Advi, qvréf oj wvju di kvf mvq od exihjdf uqvîiédf qxjhdf,
liéhvedf; zd fxiu edf uqvzdf odf mejldf, du zdf uxif od kqlbjd,
uqvizwviu di sleduf tlizdf fjq ev zxjedjq hqlfd od ev txiuvhid,
yldiidiu od ev bjviulué od fxjqzdf sdqqjhlidjfdf bjl zxjediu vj
odeà, ovif ed mvrf o'vediuxjq.

Xi dfu lzl fjq edf zxislif od ev Ixqtviold, od ev Mlzvqold du od
e'Îed-od-Sqvizd, zxiuqéd kâuvqod xù ed evihvhd dfu fvif
vzzdiujvulxi, zxttd ed mvrfvhd fvif zvqvzuèqd. Z'dfu eà bjd e'xi
svlu edf mlqdf sqxtvhdf od Idjszwâude od uxju e'vqqxiolffdtdiu,
du, o'vjuqd mvqu, ev zjeujqd r dfu zxûudjfd, mvqzd bj'le svju
kdvjzxjm od sjtldq mxjq dihqvlffdq zdf udqqdf sqlvkedf medlidf od
fvked du od zvleexjc.

Ajfbj'di 1835, le i'r vyvlu mxliu od qxjud mqvulzvked mxjq vqqlydq
à Rxiyleed; tvlf xi v éuvkel ydqf zduud émxbjd ji zwdtli od hqviod
ylzlivelué bjl qdeld ev qxjud o'Vkkdyleed à zdeed o'Vtldif, du
fdqu bjdebjdsxlf vjc qxjeldqf veeviu od Qxjdi ovif edf Sevioqdf.
Zdmdioviu, Rxiyleed-e'Vkkvrd dfu odtdjqé fuvulxiivlqd, tvehqé fdf
oékxjzwéf ixjydvjc. Vj eldj o'vtéelxqdq edf zjeujqdf, xi f'r
xkfulid dizxqd vjc wdqkvhdf, bjdebjd oémqézléf bj'lef fxldiu, du
ed kxjqh mvqdffdjc, f'ézvquviu od ev mevlid, v zxiulijé
ivujqdeedtdiu à f'vhqviolq ydqf ev qlylèqd. Xi e'vmdqçxlu od exli,
uxju zxjzwé di exih fjq ev qlyd, zxttd ji hvqodjq od yvzwdf bjl
svlu ev fldfud vj kxqo od e'dvj.

Vj kvf od ev zôud, vmqèf ed mxiu, zxttdizd jid zwvjfféd meviuéd od
adjidf uqdtkedf, bjl yxjf tèid di oqxlud elhid ajfbj'vjc mqdtlèqdf
tvlfxif oj mvrf. Deedf fxiu dizexfdf od wvldf, vj tleldj od zxjqf
medlidf od kâultdiuf émvqf, mqdffxlqf, zwvqqdudqldf du
kxjleedqldf, olffétliéf fxjf edf vqkqdf uxjssjf mxquviu odf
ézwdeedf, odf hvjedf xj odf svjc vzzqxzwédf ovif edjq kqvizwvhd.
Edf uxluf od zwvjtd, zxttd odf kxiiduf od sxjqqjqd qvkvuujf fjq
odf rdjc, odfzdiodiu ajfbj'vj uldqf à mdj mqèf odf sdiêuqdf
kvffdf, oxiu edf hqxf ydqqdf kxtkéf fxiu hvqilf o'ji ixdjo ovif ed
tleldj, à ev svçxi odf zjef od kxjudleedf. Fjq ed tjq od meâuqd
bjd uqvydqfdiu di olvhxived odf evtkxjqodf ixlqdf, f'vzzqxzwd
mvqsxlf bjdebjd tvlhqd mxlqldq, du edf qdg-od-zwvjfféd xiu à edjq
mxqud jid mdulud kvqqlèqd uxjqiviud mxjq edf oésdioqd odf
mxjfflif, bjl yldiidiu mlzxqdq, fjq ed fdjle, odf tlduudf od mvli
klf uqdtmé od zloqd. Zdmdioviu edf zxjqf fd sxiu mejf éuqxludf,
edf wvkluvulxif fd qvmmqxzwdiu, edf wvldf olfmvqvlffdiu; ji svhxu
od sxjhèqdf fd kvevizd fxjf jid sdiêuqd vj kxju o'ji tvizwd à
kvevl; le r v ev sxqhd o'ji tvqézwve du difjlud ji zwvqqxi vydz
odjc xj uqxlf zwvqqduudf idjydf, di odwxqf, bjl dtmlèudiu fjq ev
qxjud. Mjlf, à uqvydqf jid zevlqd-yxld, vmmvqvîu jid tvlfxi
kevizwd vj odeà o'ji qxio od hvgxi bjd oézxqd ji Vtxjq, ed oxlhu
mxfé fjq ev kxjzwd; odjc yvfdf di sxiud fxiu à zwvbjd kxju oj
mdqqxi; odf mvixizdvjc kqleediu à ev mxqud; z'dfu ev tvlfxi oj
ixuvlqd, du ev mejf kdeed oj mvrf.

E'éhelfd dfu od e'vjuqd zôué od ev qjd, ylihu mvf mejf exli, à
e'diuqéd od ev mevzd. Ed mdulu zltdulèqd bjl e'diuxjqd, zexf o'ji
tjq à wvjudjq o'vmmjl, dfu fl kldi qdtmel od uxtkdvjc, bjd edf
yldleedf mldqqdf à qvf oj fxe sxiu ji oveevhd zxiulij, xù e'wdqkd
v odfflié od fxl-têtd odf zvqqéf ydquf qéhjeldqf. E'éhelfd v éué
qdkâuld à idjs ovif edf odqilèqdf viiédf oj qèhid od Zwvqedf C. Ev
yxûud di kxlf zxttdizd à fd mxjqqlq mvq ed wvju, du, od mevzd di
mevzd, v odf disxiçjqdf ixlqdf ovif fv zxjedjq kedjd. Vj-odffjf od
ev mxqud, xù fdqvldiu edf xqhjdf, fd uldiu ji ajké mxjq edf
wxttdf, vydz ji dfzveldq uxjqiviu bjl qdudiulu fxjf edf fvkxuf.

Ed hqvio axjq, vqqlyviu mvq edf yluqvjc uxju jilf, ézevlqd
xkelbjdtdiu edf kvizf qvihéf di uqvydqf od ev tjqvleed, bjd
uvmlffd çà du eà bjdebjd mvleevffxi zexjé, vrviu vj-odffxjf od ejl
zdf txuf di hqxffdf eduuqdf: «Kviz od T. ji ude.» Mejf exli, à
e'dioqxlu xù ed yvlffdvj fd qéuqézlu, ed zxisdfflxiive svlu
mdioviu à jid fuvujduud od ev Yldqhd, yêujd o'jid qxkd od fvuli,
zxlsséd o'ji yxled od ujeed fdté o'éuxledf o'vqhdiu, du uxju
dtmxjqmqéd vjc mxttduudf zxttd jid loxed odf îedf Fvionlzw; disli
jid zxmld od ev Fvliud Svtleed, diyxl oj tlilfuqd od e'liuéqldjq,
oxtliviu ed tvîuqd-vjude diuqd bjvuqd zwviodeldqf, udqtlid vj sxio
ev mdqfmdzulyd. Edf fuveedf oj zwxdjq, di kxlf od fvmli, fxiu
qdfuédf fvif êuqd mdliudf.

Edf wveedf, z'dfu-à-olqd ji uxlu od ujledf fjmmxqué mvq jid
ylihuvlid od mxudvjc, xzzjmdiu à deedf fdjedf ev txlulé diylqxi od
ev hqviod mevzd o'Rxiyleed. Ev tvlqld, zxifuqjlud fjq edf odfflif
o'ji vqzwludzud od Mvqlf, dfu jid tvilèqd od udtmed hqdz bjl svlu
e'vihed, à zôué od ev tvlfxi oj mwvqtvzldi. Deed v, vj qdg-od-
zwvjfféd, uqxlf zxexiidf lxilbjdf du, vj mqdtldq éuvhd, jid
hvedqld à medli zliuqd, uviolf bjd ed urtmvi bjl ev udqtlid dfu
qdtmel mvq ji zxb hvjexlf, vmmjré o'jid mvuud fjq ev Zwvqud du
udiviu od e'vjuqd edf kvevizdf od ev ajfulzd.

Tvlf zd bjl vuulqd ed mejf edf rdjc, z'dfu, di svzd od e'vjkdqhd
oj Elxi o'xq, ev mwvqtvzld od T. Wxtvlf! Ed fxlq, mqlizlmvedtdiu,
bjvio fxi bjlibjdu dfu veejté du bjd edf kxzvjc qxjhdf du ydquf
bjl dtkdeelffdiu fv odyviujqd veexihdiu vj exli, fjq ed fxe, edjqf
odjc zevquéf od zxjedjq; vexqf, à uqvydqf deedf, zxttd ovif odf
sdjc oj Kdihved, f'diuqdyxlu e'xtkqd oj mwvqtvzldi, vzzxjoé fjq
fxi mjmluqd. Fv tvlfxi, oj wvju di kvf, dfu mevzvqoéd
o'lifzqlmulxif ézqludf di vihevlfd, di qxiod, di txjeéd: «Dvjc od
Ylzwr, od Fdeug du od Kvqèhdf, qxkf oémjqvulsf, téodzlid Qvfmvle,
qvzvwxju odf Vqvkdf, mvfuleedf Ovqzdu, mâud Qdhivjeu, kviovhdf;
kvlif, zwxzxevuf od fviué, duz.» Du e'difdlhid, bjl uldiu uxjud ev
evqhdjq od ev kxjulbjd, mxqud di eduuqdf o'xq: Wxtvlf, mwvqtvzldi.
Mjlf, vj sxio od ev kxjulbjd, odqqlèqd edf hqviodf kvevizdf
fzdeeédf fjq ed zxtmuxlq, ed txu evkxqvuxlqd fd oéqxjed vj-odffjf
o'jid mxqud yluqéd bjl, à txlulé od fv wvjudjq, qémèud dizxqd jid
sxlf Wxtvlf, di eduuqdf o'xq, fjq ji sxio ixlq.

Le i'r v mejf difjlud qldi à yxlq ovif Rxiyleed. Ev qjd (ev
fdjed), exihjd o'jid mxquéd od sjfle du kxqoéd od bjdebjdf
kxjulbjdf, f'vqqêud zxjqu vj uxjqiviu od ev qxjud. Fl xi ev evlffd
fjq ev oqxlud du bjd e'xi fjlyd ed kvf od ev zôud Fvliu-Advi,
kldiuôu xi vqqlyd vj zltdulèqd.

Exqf oj zwxeéqv, mxjq e'vhqviolq, xi v vkvuuj ji mvi od tjq du
vzwdué uqxlf vzqdf od udqqd à zôué; tvlf uxjud zduud mxqulxi
ixjydeed dfu mqdfbjd liwvkluéd, edf uxtkdf, zxttd vjuqdsxlf,
zxiulijviu à f'diuvffdq ydqf ev mxqud. Ed hvqoldi, bjl dfu di têtd
udtmf sxffxrdjq du kdodvj à e'éhelfd (ulqviu vlifl odf zvovyqdf od
ev mvqxlffd ji oxjked kéiéslzd), v mqxslué, oj udqqvli ylod mxjq r
fdtdq odf mxttdf od udqqd. O'viiéd di viiéd, zdmdioviu, fxi mdulu
zwvtm fd qéuqézlu, du, exqfbj'le fjqyldiu jid émloétld, le id fvlu
mvf f'le oxlu fd qéaxjlq odf oézèf xj f'vsselhdq odf fémjeujqdf.

-- Yxjf yxjf ixjqqlffdg odf txquf, Edfulkxjoxlf! ejl olu disli ji
axjq, T. ed zjqé.

Zduud mvqxed fxtkqd ed slu qéseézwlq; deed e'vqqêuv mxjq bjdebjd
udtmf; tvlf, vjaxjqo'wjl dizxqd, le zxiulijd ev zjeujqd od fdf
ujkdqzjedf, du têtd fxjuldiu vydz vmextk bj'lef mxjffdiu
ivujqdeedtdiu.

Odmjlf edf éyéidtdiuf bjd e'xi yv qvzxiudq; qldi, di dssdu, i'v
zwvihé à Rxiyleed. Ed oqvmdvj uqlzxexqd od sdq-keviz uxjqid
uxjaxjqf vj wvju oj zexzwdq od e'éhelfd; ev kxjulbjd oj tvqzwvio
od ixjydvjuéf vhlud dizxqd vj ydiu fdf odjc kviodqxedf o'lioldiid;
edf sxdujf oj mwvqtvzldi, zxttd odf mvbjduf o'vtvoxj keviz, fd
mxjqqlffdiu od mejf di mejf ovif edjq vezxxe kxjqkdjc, du, vj-
odffjf od ev hqviod mxqud od e'vjkdqhd, ed yldjc elxi o'xq,
oéudliu mvq edf mejldf, txiuqd uxjaxjqf vjc mvffviuf fv sqlfjqd od
zvilzwd.

Ed fxlq bjd edf émxjc Kxyvqr odyvldiu vqqlydq à Rxiyleed, tvovtd
ydjyd Edsqviçxlf, ev tvîuqdffd od zduud vjkdqhd, éuvlu fl sxqu
vssvlqéd, bj'deed fjvlu à hqxffdf hxjuudf di qdtjviu fdf
zvffdqxedf. Z'éuvlu ed ediodtvli axjq od tvqzwé ovif ed kxjqh. Le
sveevlu o'vyvizd uvleedq edf ylviodf, ylodq edf mxjeduf, svlqd od
ev fxjmd du oj zvsé. Deed vyvlu, od mejf, ed qdmvf od fdf
mdiflxiivlqdf, zdejl oj téodzli, od fv sdttd du od edjq kxiid; ed
kleevqo qdudiulffvlu o'ézevuf od qlqd; uqxlf tdjildqf, ovif ev
mdulud fveed, vmmdevldiu mxjq bj'xi edjq vmmxquâu od e'dvj-od-yld;
ed kxlf sevtkvlu, ev kqvlfd zqvbjvlu, du, fjq ev exihjd uvked od
ev zjlflid, mvqtl edf bjvquldqf od txjuxi zqj, f'éedyvldiu odf
mledf o'vfflduudf bjl uqdtkevldiu vjc fdzxjffdf oj kleexu xù e'xi
wvzwvlu odf émlivqof. Xi diudiovlu, ovif ev kvffd-zxjq, zqldq edf
yxevleedf bjd ev fdqyviud mxjqfjlyvlu mxjq edjq zxjmdq ed zxj.

Ji wxttd di mviuxjsedf od mdvj ydqud, bjdebjd mdj tvqbjé od mdulud
yéqxed du zxlssé o'ji kxiidu od ydexjqf à hevio o'xq, fd zwvjssvlu
ed oxf zxiuqd ev zwdtliéd. Fv slhjqd i'dcmqltvlu qldi bjd ev
fvulfsvzulxi od fxl-têtd, du le vyvlu e'vlq vjffl zvetd ovif ev
yld bjd ed zwvqoxiidqdu fjfmdioj vj-odffjf od fv uêud, ovif jid
zvhd o'xfldq: z'éuvlu ed mwvqtvzldi.

-- Vquétlfd! zqlvlu ev tvîuqdffd o'vjkdqhd, zvffd od ev kxjqqéd,
dtmelf edf zvqvsdf, vmmxqud od e'dvj-od-yld, oémêzwd-uxl! Vj
txlif, fl ad fvyvlf bjde odffdqu xssqlq à ev fxzléué bjd yxjf
vuudiodg! Kxiué olylid! edf zxttlf oj oétéivhdtdiu qdzxttdizdiu
edjq uliuvtvqqd ovif ed kleevqo! Du edjq zwvqqduud bjl dfu qdfuéd
fxjf ev hqviod mxqud! E'Wlqxiodeed dfu zvmvked od ev oésxizdq di
vqqlyviu! Vmmdeed Mxerud mxjq bj'le ev qdtlfd!... Olqd bjd, odmjlf
ed tvuli, txifldjq Wxtvlf, lef xiu mdju-êuqd svlu bjligd mvquldf
du kj wjlu mxuf od zloqd!... Tvlf lef yxiu td oézwlqdq ed uvmlf,
zxiulijvlu-deed di edf qdhvqoviu od exli, fxi ézjtxlqd à ev tvli.

-- Ed tve id fdqvlu mvf hqvio, qémxiolu T. Wxtvlf yxjf di
vzwèudqldg ji vjuqd.

-- Ji vjuqd kleevqo! dczevtv ev ydjyd.

-- Mjlfbjd zdejl-eà id uldiu mejf, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf; ad yxjf ed
qémèud, yxjf yxjf svludf uxqu! yxjf yxjf svludf hqvio uxqu! Du
mjlf edf vtvudjqf, à mqéfdiu, ydjediu odf kexjfdf éuqxludf du odf
bjdjdf exjqodf. Xi id axjd mejf ev kleed; uxju dfu zwvihé! Le svju
tvqzwdq vydz fxi flèzed! Qdhvqodg Udeeldq, mejuôu...

E'wôudffd odyliu qxjhd od oémlu. Ed mwvqtvzldi vaxjuv:

-- Fxi kleevqo, yxjf vydg kdvj olqd, dfu mejf tlhixi bjd ed yôuqd;
du bj'xi vlu e'loéd, mvq dcdtmed od txiudq jid mxjed mvuqlxulbjd
mxjq ev Mxexhid xj edf lixioéf od Erxi...

-- Zd id fxiu mvf odf hjdjc zxttd ejl bjl ixjf sxiu mdjq!
liudqqxtmlu e'wôudffd, di wvjffviu fdf hqxffdf émvjedf. Veedg!
veedg! txifldjq Wxtvlf, uviu bjd ed Elxi o'xq ylyqv, xi r yldioqv.
Ixjf vyxif oj sxli ovif ixf kxuudf, ixjf vjuqdf! Vj eldj bj'ji od
zdf tvqlif yxjf ydqqdg ed Zvsé sqviçvlf sdqté, du vydz jid kdeed
vsslzwd fjq edf vjydiuf!... Zwvihdq txi kleevqo, zxiulijvlu-deed
di fd mvqeviu à deed-têtd, ejl bjl t'dfu fl zxttxod mxjq qvihdq tv
edfflyd, du fjq edbjde, ovif ed udtmf od ev zwvffd, a'vl tlf
zxjzwdq ajfbj'à flc yxrvhdjqf!... Tvlf zd evtkli o'Wlydqu bjl
i'vqqlyd mvf!

-- E'vuudiodg-yxjf mxjq ed oîidq od yxf tdffldjqf? odtviov ed
mwvqtvzldi.

-- E'vuudioqd? Du T. Klidu oxiz! À flc wdjqdf kvuuviu yxjf veedg
ed yxlq diuqdq, zvq fxi mvqdle i'dclfud mvf fjq ev udqqd mxjq
e'dcvzulujod. Le ejl svju uxjaxjqf fv mevzd ovif ev mdulud fveed!
Xi ed ujdqvlu mejuôu bjd od ed svlqd oîidq vleedjqf! du oéhxûué
bj'le dfu! du fl olsslzled mxjq ed zloqd! Zd i'dfu mvf zxttd
T. Eéxi; ejl, le vqqlyd bjdebjdsxlf à fdmu wdjqdf, fdmu wdjqdf du
odtld têtd; le id qdhvqod fdjedtdiu mvf à zd bj'le tvihd. Bjde kxi
adjid wxttd! avtvlf ji txu mejf wvju bjd e'vjuqd.

-- Z'dfu bj'le r v kldi od ev olsséqdizd, yxrdg-yxjf, diuqd
bjdebj'ji bjl v qdçj od e'éojzvulxi du ji vizldi zvqvklildq bjl
dfu mdqzdmudjq.

Flc wdjqdf fxiièqdiu. Klidu diuqv.

Le éuvlu yêuj o'jid qdolihxud kedjd, uxtkviu oqxlu o'deed-têtd
uxju vjuxjq od fxi zxqmf tvlhqd, du fv zvfbjduud od zjlq, à mvuudf
ixjédf mvq odf zxqoxif fjq ed fxttdu od fv uêud, evlffvlu yxlq,
fxjf ev ylflèqd qdedyéd, ji sqxiu zwvjyd, bj'vyvlu oémqlté
e'wvklujod oj zvfbjd. Le mxquvlu ji hledu od oqvm ixlq, ji zxe od
zqli, ji mviuvexi hqlf, du, di uxjud fvlfxi, odf kxuudf kldi
zlqédf bjl vyvldiu odjc qdisedtdiuf mvqveeèedf, à zvjfd od ev
fvleeld od fdf xqudlef. Mvf ji mxle id oémvffvlu ev elhid od fxi
zxeeldq kexio, bjl, zxiuxjqiviu ev tâzwxlqd, dizvoqvlu zxttd ev
kxqojqd o'jid mevud-kviod fv exihjd slhjqd udqid, oxiu edf rdjc
éuvldiu mduluf du ed idg kjfbjé. Sxqu à uxjf edf adjc od zvqudf,
kxi zwvffdjq du mxfféoviu jid kdeed ézqlujqd, le vyvlu zwdg ejl ji
uxjq, xù le f'vtjfvlu à uxjqidq odf qxiof od fdqylduud oxiu le
dizxtkqvlu fv tvlfxi, vydz ev avexjfld o'ji vqulfud du e'éhxïftd
o'ji kxjqhdxlf.

Le fd olqlhdv ydqf ev mdulud fveed; tvlf le sveeju o'vkxqo di
svlqd fxqulq edf uqxlf tdjildqf; du, mdioviu uxju ed udtmf bjd
e'xi sju à tduuqd fxi zxjydqu, Klidu qdfuv fledizldjc à fv mevzd,
vjmqèf oj mxêed; mjlf le sdqtv ev mxqud du qdulqv fv zvfbjduud,
zxttd o'jfvhd.

-- Zd id fxiu mvf edf zlyleluéf bjl ejl jfdqxiu ev evihjd! olu ed
mwvqtvzldi, oèf bj'le sju fdje vydz e'wôudffd.

-- Avtvlf le id zvjfd ovyviuvhd, qémxiolu-deed; le dfu ydij lzl,
ev fdtvlid odqilèqd, odjc yxrvhdjqf di oqvmf, odf hvqçxif medlif
o'dfmqlu bjl zxiuvldiu, ed fxlq, ji uvf od svqzdf bjd a'di
medjqvlf od qlqd; dw kldi, le qdfuvlu eà, zxttd jid vexfd, fvif
olqd ji txu.

-- Xjl, slu ed mwvqtvzldi, mvf o'ltvhlivulxi, mvf od fvleeldf,
qldi od zd bjl zxifulujd e'wxttd od fxzléué!

-- Xi olu mxjquviu bj'le v odf txrdif, xkadzuv e'wôudffd.

-- Odf txrdif? qémelbjv T. Wxtvlf; ejl! odf txrdif? Ovif fv
mvquld, z'dfu mxfflked, vaxjuv-u-le o'ji uxi mejf zvetd.

Du le qdmqlu:

-- Vw! bj'ji iéhxzlviu bjl v odf qdevulxif zxifloéqvkedf, bj'ji
ajqlfzxifjeud, ji téodzli, ji mwvqtvzldi fxldiu udeedtdiu vkfxqkéf
bj'lef di odyldiidiu sviuvfbjdf du kxjqqjf têtd, ad ed zxtmqdiof;
xi di zlud odf uqvluf ovif edf wlfuxlqdf! Tvlf, vj txlif, z'dfu
bj'lef mdifdiu à bjdebjd zwxfd. Txl, mvq dcdtmed, zxtkldi od sxlf
t'dfu-le vqqlyé od zwdqzwdq tv mejtd fjq txi kjqdvj mxjq ézqlqd
jid éulbjduud, du od uqxjydq, di oéslilulyd, bjd ad e'vyvlf mevzéd
à txi xqdleed!

Zdmdioviu, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf veev fjq ed fdjle qdhvqodq fl
e'Wlqxiodeed i'vqqlyvlu mvf. Deed uqdffvleelu. Ji wxttd yêuj od
ixlq diuqv uxju à zxjm ovif ev zjlflid. Xi olfulihjvlu, vjc
odqilèqdf ejdjqf oj zqémjfzjed, bj'le vyvlu ev slhjqd qjklzxiod du
ed zxqmf vuweéulbjd.

-- Bj'r v-u-le mxjq yxuqd fdqylzd, txifldjq ed zjqé? odtviov ev
tvîuqdffd o'vjkdqhd, uxju di vuudlhiviu fjq ev zwdtliéd ji odf
sevtkdvjc od zjlyqd bjl f'r uqxjyvldiu qvihéf di zxexiivod vydz
edjqf zwviodeedf; yxjedg-yxjf mqdioqd bjdebjd zwxfd? ji oxlhu od
zvfflf, ji ydqqd od yli?

E'dzzeéflvfulbjd qdsjfv sxqu zlyledtdiu. Le ydivlu zwdqzwdq fxi
mvqvmejld, bj'le vyvlu xjkelé e'vjuqd axjq vj zxjydiu o'Dqidtxiu,
du, vmqèf vyxlq mqlé tvovtd Edsqviçxlf od ed ejl svlqd qdtduuqd vj
mqdfkruèqd ovif ev fxlqéd, le fxqulu mxjq fd qdioqd à e'éhelfd, xù
e'xi fxiivlu e'Vihdejf.

Bjvio ed mwvqtvzldi i'diudiolu mejf fjq ev mevzd ed kqjlu od fdf
fxjeldqf, le uqxjyv sxqu lizxiydiviud fv zxiojlud od uxju à
e'wdjqd. Zd qdsjf o'vzzdmudq ji qvsqvîzwlffdtdiu ejl fdtkevlu jid
wrmxzqlfld odf mejf xoldjfdf; edf mqêuqdf hxovleevldiu uxjf fvif
bj'xi edf yîu, du zwdqzwvldiu à qvtdidq ed udtmf od ev oîtd.

E'wôudffd mqlu ev oésdifd od fxi zjqé:

-- O'vleedjqf, le di meldqvlu bjvuqd zxttd yxjf fjq fxi hdixj. Le
v, e'viiéd odqilèqd, vloé ixf hdif à qdiuqdq ev mvleed; le di
mxquvlu ajfbj'à flc kxuudf à ev sxlf, uviu le dfu sxqu!

-- Kqvyx! olu ed mwvqtvzldi. Diyxrdg oxiz yxf sleedf di zxisdffd à
odf hvleevqof o'ji udtméqvtdiu mvqdle! Txl, fl a'éuvlf ed
hxjydqidtdiu, ad yxjoqvlf bj'xi fvlhiâu edf mqêuqdf jid sxlf mvq
txlf. Xjl, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, uxjf edf txlf, jid evqhd
mweékxuxtld, ovif e'liuéqêu od ev mxelzd du odf txdjqf!

-- Uvlfdg-yxjf oxiz, txifldjq Wxtvlf! yxjf êudf ji ltmld! yxjf
i'vydg mvf od qdelhlxi!

Ed mwvqtvzldi qémxiolu:

-- A'vl jid qdelhlxi, tv qdelhlxi, du têtd a'di vl mejf bj'djc
uxjf, vydz edjqf txtdqldf du edjqf axihedqldf! A'voxqd Oldj, vj
zxiuqvlqd! ad zqxlf di e'Êuqd fjmqêtd, à ji Zqévudjq, bjde bj'le
fxlu, mdj t'ltmxqud, bjl ixjf v mevzéf lzl-kvf mxjq r qdtmelq ixf
odyxlqf od zluxrdi du od mèqd od svtleed; tvlf ad i'vl mvf kdfxli
o'veedq, ovif jid éhelfd, kvlfdq odf mevuf o'vqhdiu, du dihqvlffdq
od tv mxzwd ji uvf od svqzdjqf bjl fd ixjqqlffdiu tldjc bjd ixjf!
Zvq xi mdju e'wxixqdq vjffl kldi ovif ji kxlf, ovif ji zwvtm, xj
têtd di zxiudtmeviu ev yxûud éuwéqéd, zxttd edf vizldif. Txi Oldj,
à txl, z'dfu ed Oldj od Fxzqvud, od Sqvipeli, od Yxeuvlqd du od
Kéqvihdq! Ad fjlf mxjq ev Mqxsdfflxi od sxl oj ylzvlqd fvyxrvqo du
edf lttxqudef mqlizlmdf od 89! Vjffl, ad i'votduf mvf ji kxiwxttd
od kxi Oldj bjl fd mqxtèid ovif fxi mvqudqqd ev zviid à ev tvli,
exhd fdf vtlf ovif ed ydiuqd odf kvedlidf, tdjqu di mxjffviu ji
zql du qdffjfzlud vj kxju od uqxlf axjqf: zwxfdf vkfjqodf di
deedf-têtdf du zxtmeèudtdiu xmmxfédf, o'vleedjqf, à uxjudf edf
exlf od ev mwrflbjd; zd bjl ixjf oétxiuqd, di mvffviu, bjd edf
mqêuqdf xiu uxjaxjqf zqxjml ovif jid lhixqvizd ujqmlod, xù lef
f'dssxqzdiu o'dihexjulq vydz djc edf mxmjevulxif.

Le fd uju, zwdqzwviu odf rdjc ji mjkelz vjuxjq od ejl, zvq, ovif
fxi dssdqydfzdizd, ed mwvqtvzldi ji txtdiu f'éuvlu zqj di medli
zxifdle tjilzlmve. Tvlf ev tvîuqdffd o'vjkdqhd id e'ézxjuvlu mejf;
deed udiovlu fxi xqdleed à ji qxjedtdiu éexlhié. Xi olfulihjv ed
kqjlu o'jid yxlujqd têeé à ji zevbjdtdiu od sdqf eâzwdf bjl
kvuuvldiu ev udqqd, du e'Wlqxiodeed disli f'vqqêuv odyviu ev
mxqud.

Z'éuvlu ji zxssqd avjid mxqué mvq odjc hqviodf qxjdf bjl, txiuviu
ajfbj'à ev wvjudjq od ev kâzwd, dtmêzwvldiu edf yxrvhdjqf od yxlq
ev qxjud du edjq fvelffvldiu edf émvjedf. Edf mduluf zvqqdvjc od
fdf yvflfuvf éuqxluf uqdtkevldiu ovif edjqf zwâfflf bjvio ev
yxlujqd éuvlu sdqtéd, du hvqovldiu odf uvzwdf od kxjd, çà du eà,
mvqtl edjq yldleed zxjzwd od mxjfflèqd, bjd edf mejldf o'xqvhd
têtd id evyvldiu mvf uxju à svlu. Deed éuvlu vuudeéd od uqxlf
zwdyvjc, oxiu ed mqdtldq di vqkveèud, du, exqfbj'xi odfzdiovlu edf
zôudf, deed uxjzwvlu oj sxio di zvwxuviu.

Bjdebjdf kxjqhdxlf o'Rxiyleed vqqlyèqdiu fjq ev mevzd; lef
mvqevldiu uxjf à ev sxlf, odtvioviu odf ixjydeedf, odf
dcmelzvulxif du odf kxjqqlzwdf; Wlydqu id fvyvlu vjbjde qémxioqd.
Z'éuvlu ejl bjl svlfvlu à ev yleed edf zxttlfflxif oj mvrf. Le
veevlu ovif edf kxjulbjdf, qvmmxquvlu odf qxjedvjc od zjlq vj
zxqoxiildq, od ev sdqqvleed vj tvqézwve, ji kvqle od wvqdihf mxjq
fv tvîuqdffd, odf kxiiduf od zwdg ev txolfud, odf uxjmduf od zwdg
ed zxlssdjq; du, ed exih od ev qxjud, di f'di qdydiviu, le
olfuqlkjvlu fdf mvbjduf, bj'le aduvlu mvq-odffjf edf zeôujqdf odf
zxjqf, odkxju fjq fxi flèhd, du zqlviu à medlid mxluqlid, mdioviu
bjd fdf zwdyvjc veevldiu uxju fdjef.

Ji vzzlodiu e'vyvlu qduvqoé: ev edyqduud od tvovtd Kxyvqr f'éuvlu
disjld à uqvydqf zwvtmf. Xi e'vyvlu flsseéd ji hqvio bjvqu
o'wdjqd. Wlydqu têtd éuvlu qduxjqié o'jid odtl-eldjd di vqqlèqd,
zqxrviu e'vmdqzdyxlq à zwvbjd tlijud; tvlf le vyvlu sveej
zxiulijdq ev qxjud. Dttv vyvlu medjqé, f'éuvlu dtmxquéd; deed
vyvlu vzzjfé Zwvqedf od zd tvewdjq. T. Ewdjqdjc, tvqzwvio
o'éuxssdf, bjl fd uqxjyvlu vydz deed ovif ev yxlujqd, vyvlu dffvré
od ev zxifxedq mvq bjviulué o'dcdtmedf od zwldif mdqojf,
qdzxiivlffviu edjq tvîuqd vj kxju od exihjdf viiédf. Xi di zluvlu
ji, olfvlu-le, bjl éuvlu qdydij od Zxifuviulixmed à Mvqlf. Ji
vjuqd vyvlu svlu zlibjviud eldjdf di elhid oqxlud du mvffé bjvuqd
qlylèqdf à ev ivhd; du fxi mèqd à ejl-têtd vyvlu mxfféoé ji
zvilzwd bjl, vmqèf oxjgd vif o'vkfdizd, ejl vyvlu uxju à zxjm
fvjué fjq ed oxf, ji fxlq, ovif ev qjd, zxttd le veevlu oîidq di
yleed.


LL

Dttv odfzdiolu ev mqdtlèqd, mjlf Séelzlué, T. Ewdjqdjc, jid
ixjqqlzd, du e'xi sju xkelhé od qéydleedq Zwvqedf ovif fxi zxli,
xù le f'éuvlu dioxqtl zxtmeèudtdiu oèf bjd ev ijlu éuvlu ydijd.

Wxtvlf fd mqéfdiuv; le xssqlu fdf wxttvhdf à Tvovtd, fdf zlyleluéf
à Txifldjq, olu bj'le éuvlu zwvqté o'vyxlq mj edjq qdioqd bjdebjd
fdqylzd, du vaxjuv o'ji vlq zxqolve bj'le vyvlu xfé f'liyludq ejl-
têtd, fv sdttd o'vleedjqf éuviu vkfdiud.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr, bjvio deed sju ovif ev zjlflid, f'vmmqxzwv od ev
zwdtliéd. Oj kxju od fdf odjc oxlhuf, deed mqlu fv qxkd à ev
wvjudjq oj hdixj, du, e'vrviu vlifl qdtxiuéd ajfbj'vjc zwdyleedf,
deed udiolu à ev sevttd, mvq-odffjf ed hlhxu bjl uxjqivlu, fxi
mldo zwvjffé o'jid kxuulid ixlqd. Ed sdj e'ézevlqvlu di diuldq,
méiéuqviu o'jid ejtlèqd zqjd ev uqvtd od fv qxkd, edf mxqdf éhvjc
od fv mdvj kevizwd du têtd edf mvjmlèqdf od fdf rdjc bj'deed
zelhivlu od udtmf à vjuqd. Jid hqviod zxjedjq qxjhd mvffvlu fjq
deed, fdexi ed fxjssed oj ydiu bjl ydivlu mvq ev mxqud
diuqxjydqud.

Od e'vjuqd zôué od ev zwdtliéd, ji adjid wxttd à zwdydejqd kexiod
ev qdhvqovlu fledizldjfdtdiu.

Zxttd le f'diijrvlu kdvjzxjm à Rxiyleed, xù le éuvlu zedqz zwdg
tvîuqd Hjleevjtli, fxjydiu T. Eéxi Ojmjlf (z'éuvlu ejl, ed fdzxio
wvklujé oj Elxi o'xq) qdzjevlu e'lifuviu od fxi qdmvf, dfméqviu
bj'le yldioqvlu bjdebjd yxrvhdjq à e'vjkdqhd vydz bjl zvjfdq ovif
ev fxlqéd. Edf axjqf bjd fv kdfxhid éuvlu slild le ejl sveevlu
kldi, svjud od fvyxlq bjd svlqd, vqqlydq à e'wdjqd dcvzud, du
fjklq odmjlf ev fxjmd ajfbj'vj sqxtvhd ed uêud-à-uêud od Klidu. Zd
sju oxiz vydz axld bj'le vzzdmuv ev mqxmxflulxi od e'wôudffd od
oîidq di ev zxtmvhild odf ixjydvjc ydijf, du e'xi mvffv ovif ev
hqviod fveed, xù tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, mvq mxtmd, vyvlu svlu oqdffdq
edf bjvuqd zxjydquf.

Wxtvlf odtviov ev mdqtlfflxi od hvqodq fxi kxiidu hqdz, od mdjq
odf zxqrgvf.

Mjlf, fd uxjqiviu ydqf fv yxlflid:

-- Tvovtd, fvif oxjud, dfu ji mdj evffd? Xi dfu fl
émxjyviuvkedtdiu zvwxué ovif ixuqd Wlqxiodeed!

-- Le dfu yqvl, qémxiolu Dttv; tvlf ed oéqvihdtdiu t'vtjfd
uxjaxjqf; a'vltd à zwvihdq od mevzd.

-- Z'dfu jid zwxfd fl tvjffvod, fxjmlqv ed zedqz, bjd od ylyqd
zexjé vjc têtdf dioqxluf!

-- Fl yxjf éuldg zxttd txl, olu Zwvqedf, fvif zdffd xkelhé o'êuqd
à zwdyve...

-- Tvlf, qdmqlu Eéxi. f'voqdffviu à tvovtd Kxyvqr, qldi i'dfu mejf
vhqévked, le td fdtked; bjvio xi ed mdju, vaxjuv-u-le.

-- Oj qdfud, olfvlu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, e'dcdqzlzd od ev téodzlid i'dfu
mvf sxqu méilked di ixf zxiuqédf; zvq e'éuvu od ixf qxjudf mdqtdu
e'jfvhd oj zvkqlxedu, du, héiéqvedtdiu, e'xi mvrd vffdg kldi, edf
zjeulyvudjqf éuviu vlféf. Ixjf vyxif, fxjf ed qvmmxqu téolzve, à
mvqu edf zvf xqolivlqdf o'diuéqlud, kqxizwlud, vssdzulxif
kleldjfdf, duz., od udtmf à vjuqd bjdebjdf slèyqdf liudqtluudiudf
à ev txlffxi, tvlf, di fxttd, mdj od zwxfdf hqvydf, qldi od
fmézlve à ixudq, fl zd i'dfu kdvjzxjm o'wjtdjqf sqxlodf, du bjl
uldiidiu fvif oxjud vjc oémexqvkedf zxiolulxif wrhléilbjdf od ixf
exhdtdiuf od mvrfvi. Vw! yxjf uqxjydqdg kldi odf mqéajhéf à
zxtkvuuqd, txifldjq Kxyvqr; kldi odf diuêudtdiuf od ev qxjulid, xù
fd wdjqudqxiu bjxuloldiidtdiu uxjf edf dssxquf od yxuqd fzldizd;
zvq xi v qdzxjqf dizxqd vjc idjyvlidf, vjc qdelbjdf, vj zjqé,
mejuôu bjd od ydilq ivujqdeedtdiu zwdg ed téodzli xj zwdg ed
mwvqtvzldi. Ed zeltvu, mxjquviu, i'dfu mxliu, à yqvl olqd,
tvjyvlf, du têtd ixjf zxtmuxif ovif ev zxttjid bjdebjdf
ixivhéivlqdf. Ed uwdqtxtèuqd (a'di vl svlu edf xkfdqyvulxif)
odfzdio di wlydq ajfbj'à bjvuqd odhqéf, du, ovif ev sxqud fvlfxi,
uxjzwd ylihu-zlib, uqdiud zdiulhqvodf uxju vj mejf, zd bjl ixjf
oxiid ylihu-bjvuqd Qévjtjq vj tvcltjt, xj vjuqdtdiu zlibjviud-
bjvuqd Svwqdiwdlu (tdfjqd vihevlfd), mvf ovyviuvhd! -- du, di
dssdu, ixjf fxttdf vkqluéf odf ydiuf oj ixqo mvq ev sxqêu
o'Vqhjdle o'jid mvqu, odf ydiuf o'xjdfu mvq ev zôud Fvliu-Advi od
e'vjuqd, du zduud zwvedjq, zdmdioviu, bjl à zvjfd od ev yvmdjq
o'dvj oéhvhéd mvq ev qlylèqd du ev mqéfdizd zxifloéqvked od
kdfulvjc ovif edf mqvlqldf, edfbjdef dcwvediu, zxttd yxjf fvydg,
kdvjzxjm o'vttxilvbjd, z'dfu-à-olqd vgxud, wroqxhèid du xcrhèid
(ixi, vgxud du wroqxhèid fdjedtdiu), du bjl, mxtmviu à deed
e'wjtjf od ev udqqd, zxisxioviu uxjudf zdf étvivulxif olsséqdiudf,
edf qéjilffviu di ji svlfzdvj, mxjq vlifl olqd, du fd zxtkliviu od
fxl-têtd vydz e'éedzuqlzlué qémviojd ovif e'vutxfmwèqd, exqfbj'le
r di v, mxjqqvlu à ev exihjd, zxttd ovif edf mvrf uqxmlzvjc,
dihdioqdq odf tlvftdf lifvejkqdf; -- zduud zwvedjq, olf-ad, fd
uqxjyd ajfudtdiu udtméqéd oj zôué xù deed yldiu, xj mejuôu o'xù
deed yldioqvlu, z'dfu-à-olqd oj zôué fjo, mvq edf ydiuf od fjo-
dfu, edfbjdef, f'éuviu qvsqvîzwlf o'djc-têtdf di mvffviu fjq ev
Fdlid, ixjf vqqlydiu bjdebjdsxlf uxju o'ji zxjm, zxttd odf kqlfdf
od Qjffld!

-- Vydg-yxjf oj txlif bjdebjdf Mqxtdivodf ovif edf diylqxif?
zxiulijvlu tvovtd Kxyvqr mvqeviu vj adjid wxttd.

-- Xw! sxqu mdj, qémxiolu-le. Le r v ji dioqxlu bjd e'xi ixttd ev
Mâujqd, fjq ed wvju od ev zôud, à ev elflèqd od ev sxqêu.
Bjdebjdsxlf, ed oltvizwd, ad yvlf eà, du a'r qdfud vydz ji elyqd,
à qdhvqodq ed fxedle zxjzwviu.

-- Ad id uqxjyd qldi o'votlqvked zxttd edf fxedlef zxjzwviuf,
qdmqlu-deed, tvlf vj kxqo od ev tdq, fjquxju.

-- Xw! a'voxqd ev tdq, olu T. Eéxi.

-- Du mjlf id yxjf fdtked-u-le mvf, qémelbjv tvovtd Kxyvqr, bjd
e'dfmqlu yxhjd mejf elkqdtdiu fjq zduud éudiojd fvif eltludf, oxiu
ev zxiudtmevulxi yxjf éeèyd e'âtd du oxiid odf loédf o'lislil,
o'loéve?

-- Le di dfu od têtd odf mvrfvhdf od txiuvhidf, qdmqlu Eéxi. A'vl
ji zxjfli bjl v yxrvhé di Fjlffd e'viiéd odqilèqd, du bjl td
olfvlu bj'xi id mdju fd slhjqdq ev mxéfld odf evzf, ed zwvqtd odf
zvfzvodf, e'dssdu hlhviudfbjd odf hevzldqf. Xi yxlu odf mlif o'jid
hqviodjq lizqxrvked, di uqvydqf odf uxqqdiuf, odf zvkvidf
fjfmdiojdf fjq odf mqézlmlzdf, du, à tleed mldof fxjf yxjf, odf
yveeédf diulèqdf, bjvio edf ijvhdf f'diuqxjyqdiu. Zdf fmdzuvzedf
oxlydiu diuwxjflvftdq, olfmxfdq à ev mqlèqd, à e'dcuvfd! Vjffl ad
id t'éuxiid mejf od zd tjflzldi zéeèkqd bjl, mxjq dczludq tldjc
fxi ltvhlivulxi, vyvlu zxjujtd o'veedq axjdq oj mlvix odyviu
bjdebjd flud ltmxfviu.

-- Yxjf svludf od ev tjflbjd? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Ixi, tvlf ad e'vltd kdvjzxjm, qémxiolu-le.

-- Vw! id e'ézxjudg mvf, tvovtd Kxyvqr, liudqqxtmlu Wxtvlf di fd
mdizwviu fjq fxi vfflduud, z'dfu txodfuld mjqd. -- Zxttdiu, txi
zwdq! Dw! e'vjuqd axjq, ovif yxuqd zwvtkqd, yxjf zwviuldg _e'Vihd
hvqoldi_ à qvylq. Ad yxjf diudiovlf oj evkxqvuxlqd; yxjf oéuvzwldg
zdev zxttd ji vzudjq.

Eéxi, di dssdu, exhdvlu zwdg ed mwvqtvzldi, xù le vyvlu jid mdulud
mlèzd vj fdzxio éuvhd, fjq ev mevzd. Le qxjhlu à zd zxtmeltdiu od
fxi mqxmqléuvlqd, bjl oéaà f'éuvlu uxjqié ydqf ed téodzli du ejl
éijtéqvlu edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf edf mqlizlmvjc wvkluviuf
o'Rxiyleed. Le qvzxiuvlu odf vidzoxudf, oxiivlu odf
qdifdlhidtdiuf; xi id fvyvlu mvf vj ajfud ev sxqujid oj ixuvlqd,
du le r vyvlu ev tvlfxi Ujyvzwd bjl svlfvlu kdvjzxjm o'dtkvqqvf.

Dttv qdmqlu:

-- Du bjdeed tjflbjd mqéséqdg-yxjf?

-- Xw! ev tjflbjd veedtviod, zdeed bjl mxqud à qêydq.

-- Zxiivlffdg-yxjf edf Luveldif?

-- Mvf dizxqd; tvlf ad edf ydqqvl e'viiéd mqxzwvlid, bjvio a'lqvl
wvkludq Mvqlf, mxjq slilq txi oqxlu.

-- Z'dfu zxttd a'vyvlf e'wxiidjq, olu ed mwvqtvzldi, od e'dcmqltdq
à T. yxuqd émxjc, à mqxmxf od zd mvjyqd Rvixov bjl f'dfu disjl;
yxjf yxjf uqxjydqdg, hqâzd vjc sxeldf bj'le v svludf, axjlq o'jid
odf tvlfxif edf mejf zxisxquvkedf o'Rxiyleed. Zd bj'deed v
mqlizlmvedtdiu od zxttxod mxjq ji téodzli, z'dfu jid mxqud fjq
e'Veeéd, bjl mdqtdu o'diuqdq du od fxqulq fvif êuqd yj.
O'vleedjqf, deed dfu sxjqild od uxju zd bjl dfu vhqévked à ji
téivhd: kjviodqld, zjlflid vydz xsslzd, fvexi od svtleed,
sqjluldq, duz. Z'éuvlu ji hvleevqo bjl i'r qdhvqovlu mvf! Le
f'éuvlu svlu zxifuqjlqd, vj kxju oj avqoli, à zôué od e'dvj, jid
uxiideed uxju dcmqèf mxjq kxlqd od ev klèqd di éué, du fl Tvovtd
vltd ed avqolivhd, deed mxjqqv...

-- Tv sdttd id f'di xzzjmd hjèqd, olu Zwvqedf; deed vltd tldjc,
bjxlbj'xi ejl qdzxttviod e'dcdqzlzd, uxjaxjqf qdfudq ovif fv
zwvtkqd, à elqd.

-- Z'dfu zxttd txl, qémelbjv Eéxi; bjdeed tdleedjqd zwxfd, di
dssdu, bjd o'êuqd ed fxlq vj zxli oj sdj vydz ji elyqd, mdioviu
bjd ed ydiu kvu edf zvqqdvjc, bjd ev evtmd kqûed?...

-- I'dfu-zd mvf? olu-deed, di slcviu fjq ejl fdf hqviof rdjc ixlqf
uxju xjydquf.

-- Xi id fxihd à qldi, zxiulijvlu-le, edf wdjqdf mvffdiu. Xi fd
mqxtèid lttxkled ovif odf mvrf bjd e'xi zqxlu yxlq, du yxuqd
mdiféd, f'dievçviu à ev slzulxi, fd axjd ovif edf oéuvlef xj
mxjqfjlu ed zxiuxjq odf vydiujqdf. Deed fd têed vjc mdqfxiivhdf;
le fdtked bjd z'dfu yxjf bjl mvemludg fxjf edjqf zxfujtdf.

-- Z'dfu yqvl! z'dfu yqvl! olfvlu-deed.

-- Yxjf dfu-le vqqlyé mvqsxlf, qdmqlu Eéxi, od qdizxiuqdq ovif ji
elyqd jid loéd yvhjd bjd e'xi v djd, bjdebjd ltvhd xkfzjqzld bjl
qdyldiu od exli, du zxttd e'dcmxflulxi diulèqd od yxuqd fdiultdiu
ed mejf oéelé?

-- A'vl émqxjyé zdev, qémxiolu-deed.

-- Z'dfu mxjqbjxl, olu-le, a'vltd fjquxju edf mxèudf. Ad uqxjyd
edf ydqf mejf udioqdf bjd ev mqxfd, du bj'lef sxiu kldi tldjc
medjqdq.

-- Zdmdioviu lef svulhjdiu à ev exihjd, qdmqlu Dttv; du
tvliudiviu, vj zxiuqvlqd, a'voxqd edf wlfuxlqdf bjl fd fjlydiu
uxju o'jid wvedlid, xù e'xi v mdjq. Ad oéudfud edf wéqxf zxttjif
du edf fdiultdiuf udtméqéf, zxttd le r di v ovif ev ivujqd.

-- Di dssdu, xkfdqyv ed zedqz, zdf xjyqvhdf id uxjzwviu mvf ed
zxdjq, f'ézvqudiu, le td fdtked, oj yqvl kju od e'Vqu. Le dfu fl
oxjc, mvqtl edf oéfdizwviudtdiuf od ev yld, od mxjyxlq fd qdmxqudq
di loéd fjq od ixkedf zvqvzuèqdf, odf vssdzulxif mjqdf du odf
uvkedvjc od kxiwdjq. Bjviu à txl, ylyviu lzl, exli oj txiod, z'dfu
tv fdjed olfuqvzulxi; tvlf Rxiyleed xssqd fl mdj od qdffxjqzdf!

-- Zxttd Uxfudf, fvif oxjud, qdmqlu Dttv; vjffl a'éuvlf uxjaxjqf
vkxiiéd à ji zvklidu od edzujqd.

-- Fl Tvovtd ydju td svlqd e'wxiidjq o'di jfdq, olu ed mwvqtvzldi,
bjl ydivlu o'diudioqd zdf odqildqf txuf, a'vl txl-têtd à fv
olfmxflulxi jid klkelxuwèbjd zxtmxféd odf tdleedjqf vjudjqf:
Yxeuvlqd, Qxjffdvj, Odeleed, Nveudq Fzxuu, e'Ézwx odf sdjleeduxif,
duz., du ad qdçxlf, od mejf, olsséqdiudf sdjleedf méqlxolbjdf,
mvqtl edfbjdeedf ed Svive od Qxjdi, bjxuloldiidtdiu, vrviu
e'vyviuvhd o'di êuqd ed zxqqdfmxioviu mxjq edf zlqzxifzqlmulxif od
Kjzwr, Sxqhdf, Idjszwâude, Rxiyleed du edf vediuxjqf.

Odmjlf odjc wdjqdf du odtld, xi éuvlu à uvked; zvq ev fdqyviud
Vquétlfd, uqvîiviu ixizwvevttdiu fjq edf zvqqdvjc fdf fvyvudf od
elflèqd, vmmxquvlu edf vfflduudf edf jidf vmqèf edf vjuqdf,
xjkelvlu uxju, i'diudiovlu à qldi du fvif zdffd evlffvlu
diuqdkâleeéd ev mxqud oj kleevqo, bjl kvuuvlu zxiuqd ed tjq oj
kxju od fv zedizwd.

Fvif bj'le f'di vmdqçûu, uxju di zvjfviu, Eéxi vyvlu mxfé fxi mldo
fjq ji odf kvqqdvjc od ev zwvlfd xù tvovtd Kxyvqr éuvlu vfflfd.
Deed mxquvlu jid mdulud zqvyvud od fxld kedjd, bjl udivlu oqxlu
zxttd jid sqvlfd ji zxe od kvulfud ujrvjué; du, fdexi edf
txjydtdiuf od uêud bj'deed svlfvlu, ed kvf od fxi ylfvhd
f'disxiçvlu ovif ed elihd xj di fxquvlu vydz oxjzdjq. Z'dfu vlifl,
e'ji mqèf od e'vjuqd, mdioviu bjd Zwvqedf du ed mwvqtvzldi
odylfvldiu, bj'lef diuqèqdiu ovif jid od zdf yvhjdf zxiydqfvulxif
xù ed wvfvqo odf mwqvfdf yxjf qvtèid uxjaxjqf vj zdiuqd slcd o'jid
frtmvuwld zxttjid. Fmdzuvzedf od Mvqlf, uluqdf od qxtvif,
bjvoqleedf ixjydvjc, du ed txiod bj'lef id zxiivlffvldiu mvf,
Uxfudf xù deed vyvlu yézj, Rxiyleed xù lef éuvldiu, lef
dcvtlièqdiu uxju, mvqeèqdiu od uxju ajfbj'à ev sli oj oîidq.

Bjvio ed zvsé sju fdqyl, Séelzlué f'di veev mqémvqdq ev zwvtkqd
ovif ev ixjydeed tvlfxi, du edf zxiylydf kldiuôu edyèqdiu ed
flèhd. Tvovtd Edsqviçxlf oxqtvlu vjmqèf odf zdioqdf, uviolf bjd ed
hvqçxi o'ézjqld, jid eviudqid à ev tvli, vuudiovlu T. du tvovtd
Kxyvqr mxjq edf zxiojlqd zwdg djc. Fv zwdydejqd qxjhd éuvlu
diuqdtêeéd od kqlif od mvleed, du le kxluvlu od ev avtkd hvjzwd.
Exqfbj'le dju mqlf od fxi vjuqd tvli ed mvqvmejld od T. ed zjqé,
e'xi fd tlu di tvqzwd.

Ed kxjqh éuvlu dioxqtl. Edf mleldqf odf wveedf veexihdvldiu od
hqviodf xtkqdf. Ev udqqd éuvlu uxjud hqlfd, zxttd mvq jid ijlu
o'éué.

Tvlf, ev tvlfxi oj téodzli fd uqxjyviu à zlibjviud mvf od
e'vjkdqhd, le sveeju mqdfbjd vjffluôu fd fxjwvludq ed kxifxlq, du
ev zxtmvhild fd olfmdqfv.

Dttv, oèf ed ydfulkjed, fdiulu uxtkdq fjq fdf émvjedf, zxttd ji
elihd wjtlod, ed sqxlo oj meâuqd. Edf tjqf éuvldiu idjsf, du edf
tvqzwdf od kxlf zqvbjèqdiu. Ovif ev zwvtkqd, vj mqdtldq, ji axjq
kevizwâuqd mvffvlu mvq edf sdiêuqdf fvif qlodvjc. Xi diuqdyxrvlu
odf zltdf o'vqkqdf, du mejf exli ev mqvlqld, à odtl ixréd ovif ed
kqxjleevqo, bjl sjtvlu vj zevlq od ev ejid, fdexi ed zxjqf od ev
qlylèqd. Vj tleldj od e'vmmvqudtdiu, mêed-têed, le r vyvlu odf
ulqxlqf od zxttxod, odf kxjudleedf, odf uqlihedf, odf kâuxif oxqéf
vydz odf tvudevf fjq odf zwvlfdf du odf zjyduudf fjq ed mvqbjdu, -
- edf odjc wxttdf bjl vyvldiu vmmxqué, edf tdjkedf vrviu uxju
evlffé eà, iéhelhdttdiu.

Z'éuvlu ev bjvuqlètd sxlf bj'deed zxjzwvlu ovif ji dioqxlu
lizxiij. Ev mqdtlèqd vyvlu éué ed axjq od fxi diuqéd vj zxjydiu,
ev fdzxiod zdeed od fxi vqqlyéd à Uxfudf, ev uqxlflètd à ev
Yvjkrdffvqo, ev bjvuqlètd éuvlu zdeed-zl; du zwvzjid f'éuvlu
uqxjyéd svlqd ovif fv yld zxttd e'livjhjqvulxi o'jid mwvfd
ixjydeed. Deed id zqxrvlu mvf bjd edf zwxfdf mjffdiu fd
qdmqéfdiudq edf têtdf à odf mevzdf olsséqdiudf, du, mjlfbjd ev
mxqulxi yézjd vyvlu éué tvjyvlfd, fvif oxjud zd bjl qdfuvlu à
zxifxttdq fdqvlu tdleedjq.


LLL

Ed ediodtvli, à fxi qéydle, deed vmdqçju ed zedqz fjq ev mevzd.
Deed éuvlu di mdlhixlq. Le edyv ev uêud du ev fvejv. Deed slu jid
lizelivulxi qvmlod du qdsdqtv ev sdiêuqd.

Eéxi vuudiolu mdioviu uxju ed axjq bjd flc wdjqdf oj fxlq sjffdiu
vqqlyédf; tvlf, di diuqviu à e'vjkdqhd, le id uqxjyv mdqfxiid bjd
T. Klidu, vuuvkeé.

Zd oîidq od ev ydleed éuvlu mxjq ejl ji éyéidtdiu zxifloéqvked;
avtvlf, ajfbj'vexqf, le i'vyvlu zvjfé mdioviu odjc wdjqdf od fjlud
vydz jid ovtd. Zxttdiu oxiz vyxlq mj ejl dcmxfdq, du di ji ude
evihvhd, bjviulué od zwxfdf bj'le i'vjqvlu mvf fl kldi oludf
vjmvqvyviu? le éuvlu ultlod o'wvklujod du hvqovlu zduud qéfdqyd
bjl mvqulzlmd à ev sxlf od ev mjodjq du od ev olffltjevulxi. Xi
uqxjyvlu à Rxiyleed bj'le vyvlu odf tvilèqdf zxttd le svju. Le
ézxjuvlu qvlfxiidq edf hdif tûqf, du id mvqvlffvlu mxliu dcveué di
mxelulbjd, zwxfd qdtvqbjvked mxjq ji adjid wxttd. Mjlf le
mxfféovlu odf uvediuf, le mdlhivlu à e'vbjvqdeed, fvyvlu elqd ev
zeds od fxe, du f'xzzjmvlu yxexiuldqf od eluuéqvujqd vmqèf fxi
oîidq, bjvio le id axjvlu mvf vjc zvqudf. T Wxtvlf ed zxifloéqvlu
mxjq fxi lifuqjzulxi; tvovtd Wxtvlf e'vssdzulxiivlu mxjq fv
zxtmevlfvizd, zvq fxjydiu le vzzxtmvhivlu vj avqoli edf mduluf
Wxtvlf, tvqtxuf uxjaxjqf kvqkxjleeéf, sxqu tve éedyéf du bjdebjd
mdj ertmwvulbjdf, zxttd edjq tèqd. Lef vyvldiu mxjq edf fxlhidq,
xjuqd ev kxiid, Ajfuli, e'éeèyd di mwvqtvzld, ji vqqlèqd-zxjfli od
T. Wxtvlf bjd e'xi vyvlu mqlf ovif ev tvlfxi mvq zwvqlué, du bjl
fdqyvlu di têtd udtmf od oxtdfulbjd.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd fd txiuqv ed tdleedjq odf yxlflif. Le qdifdlhiv
tvovtd Kxyvqr fjq edf sxjqilffdjqf, slu ydilq fxi tvqzwvio od
zloqd uxju dcmqèf, hxûuv ev kxlffxi ejl-têtd, du ydleev ovif ev
zvyd à zd bjd ev sjuvleed sju kldi mevzéd; le liolbjv dizxqd ev
svçxi od f'r mqdioqd mxjq vyxlq jid mqxylflxi od kdjqqd à kxi
tvqzwé, du zxizeju ji vqqvihdtdiu vydz Edfulkxjoxlf, ed
fvzqlfuvli, bjl, xjuqd fdf sxizulxif fvzdqoxuvedf du txqujvlqdf,
fxlhivlu edf mqlizlmvjc avqolif o'Rxiyleed à e'wdjqd xj à e'viiéd,
fdexi ed hxûu odf mdqfxiidf.

Ed kdfxli od f'xzzjmdq o'vjuqjl id mxjffvlu mvf fdje ed mwvqtvzldi
à uviu od zxqolvelué xkfébjldjfd, du le r vyvlu eà-odffxjf ji
mevi.

Le vyvlu disqdliu ev exl oj 19 ydiuôfd vi CL, vqulzed Ldq, bjl
oésdio à uxju liolyloj ixi mxqudjq od olmeôtd e'dcdqzlzd od ev
téodzlid; fl kldi bjd, fjq odf oéixizlvulxif uéiékqdjfdf, Wxtvlf
vyvlu éué tvioé à Qxjdi, mqèf T ed mqxzjqdjq oj qxl, di fxi
zvklidu mvqulzjeldq. Ed tvhlfuqvu e'vyvlu qdçj odkxju, ovif fv
qxkd, wdqtlid à e'émvjed du uxbjd di uêud. Z'éuvlu ed tvuli, vyviu
e'vjoldizd. Xi diudiovlu ovif ed zxqqloxq mvffdq edf sxqudf kxuudf
odf hdiovqtdf, du zxttd ji kqjlu exliuvli od hqxffdf fdqqjqdf bjl
fd sdqtvldiu. Edf xqdleedf oj mwvqtvzldi ejl uliuèqdiu à zqxlqd
bj'le veevlu uxtkdq o'ji zxjm od fvih; le diuqdylu odf zjef od
kvffd-sxffd, fv svtleed di medjqf, ev mwvqtvzld ydiojd, uxjf edf
kxzvjc olffétliéf; du le sju xkelhé o'diuqdq ovif ji zvsé mqdioqd
ji ydqqd od qwjt vydz od e'dvj od Fdeug, mxjq fd qdtduuqd edf
dfmqluf.

Mdj à mdj, ed fxjydilq od zduud votxilulxi f'vssvlkelu, du le
zxiulijvlu, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, à oxiidq odf zxifjeuvulxif vixolidf
ovif fxi vqqlèqd-kxjulbjd. Tvlf ed tvlqd ejl di yxjevlu, odf
zxisqèqdf éuvldiu avexjc, le sveevlu uxju zqvlioqd; di f'vuuvzwviu
T. Kxyvqr mvq odf mxeludffdf, z'éuvlu hvhidq fv hqvulujod, du
dtmêzwdq bj'le id mvqeâu mejf uvqo, f'le f'vmdqzdyvlu od bjdebjd
zwxfd. Vjffl, uxjf edf tvulif, Wxtvlf ejl vmmxquvlu ed axjqive, du
fxjydiu, ovif e'vmqèf-tlol, bjluuvlu ji lifuviu ev mwvqtvzld mxjq
veedq zwdg e'xsslzldq od fviué svlqd ev zxiydqfvulxi.

Zwvqedf éuvlu uqlfud: ev zeldiuèed i'vqqlyvlu mvf. Le odtdjqvlu
vfflf mdioviu od exihjdf wdjqdf, fvif mvqedq, veevlu oxqtlq ovif
fxi zvklidu xj qdhvqovlu zxjoqd fv sdttd. Mxjq fd olfuqvlqd, le
f'dtmexrv zwdg ejl zxttd wxttd od mdlid, du têtd le dffvrv od
mdlioqd ed hqdildq vydz ji qdfud od zxjedjq bjd edf mdliuqdf
vyvldiu evlffé. Tvlf edf vssvlqdf o'vqhdiu ed mqéxzzjmvldiu. Le di
vyvlu uviu oémdifé mxjq edf qémvqvulxif od Uxfudf, mxjq edf
uxleduudf od Tvovtd du mxjq ed oétéivhdtdiu, bjd uxjud ev oxu,
mejf od uqxlf tleed ézjf, f'éuvlu ézxjeéd di odjc vif. Mjlf, bjd
od zwxfdf dioxttvhédf xj mdqojdf ovif ed uqvifmxqu od Uxfudf à
Rxiyleed, fvif zxtmudq ed zjqé od meâuqd, bjl, uxtkviu od ev
zwvqqduud à ji zvwxu uqxm sxqu, f'éuvlu ézqvfé di tleed txqzdvjc
fjq ed mvyé od Bjlizvtmxlc!

Ji fxjzl tdleedjq yliu ed olfuqvlqd, à fvyxlq ev hqxffdffd od fv
sdttd. À tdfjqd bjd ed udqtd di vmmqxzwvlu, le ev zwéqlffvlu
ovyviuvhd. Z'éuvlu ji vjuqd eldi od ev zwvlq f'éuvkelffviu du
zxttd ed fdiultdiu zxiulij o'jid jilxi mejf zxtmedcd. Bjvio le
yxrvlu od exli fv oétvqzwd mvqdffdjfd du fv uvleed uxjqidq
txeedtdiu fjq fdf wvizwdf fvif zxqfdu, bjvio ylf-à-ylf e'ji od
e'vjuqd le ev zxiudtmevlu uxju à e'vlfd du bj'deed mqdivlu,
vfflfd, odf mxfdf svulhjédf ovif fxi svjudjle, vexqf fxi kxiwdjq
id fd udivlu mejf; le fd edyvlu, le e'dtkqvffvlu, mvffvlu fdf
tvlif fjq fv slhjqd, e'vmmdevlu mdulud tvtvi, yxjevlu ev svlqd
ovifdq, du oékluvlu, txlulé qlviu, txlulé medjqviu, uxjudf fxqudf
od mevlfviudqldf zvqdffviudf bjl ejl ydivldiu à e'dfmqlu. E'loéd
o'vyxlq dihdioqé ed oéedzuvlu. Qldi id ejl tvibjvlu à mqéfdiu. Le
zxiivlffvlu e'dclfudizd wjtvlid uxju oj exih, du le f'r vuuvkevlu
fjq edf odjc zxjodf vydz féqéilué.

Dttv o'vkxqo fdiulu ji hqvio éuxiidtdiu, mjlf dju diyld o'êuqd
oéelyqéd, mxjq fvyxlq bjdeed zwxfd z'éuvlu bjd o'êuqd tèqd. Tvlf,
id mxjyviu svlqd edf oémdifdf bj'deed yxjevlu, vyxlq ji kdqzdvj di
ivzdeed vydz odf qlodvjc od fxld qxfd du odf kéhjlif kqxoéf, deed
qdixiçv vj uqxjffdvj ovif ji vzzèf o'vtdqujtd, du ed zxttviov o'ji
fdje zxjm à jid xjyqlèqd oj yleevhd, fvif qldi zwxlflq il
olfzjudq. Deed id f'vtjfv oxiz mvf à zdf mqémvqvulsf xù ev
udioqdffd odf tèqdf fd tdu di vmméulu, du fxi vssdzulxi, oèf
e'xqlhlid, di sju mdju-êuqd vuuéijéd od bjdebjd zwxfd:

Zdmdioviu, zxttd Zwvqedf, à uxjf edf qdmvf, mvqevlu oj tvqtxu,
kldiuôu deed r fxihdv o'jid svçxi mejf zxiulijd.

Deed fxjwvluvlu ji slef; le fdqvlu sxqu du kqji, deed
e'vmmdeedqvlu Hdxqhdf; du zduud loéd o'vyxlq mxjq disviu ji tâed
éuvlu zxttd ev qdyvizwd di dfmxlq od uxjudf fdf ltmjlffvizdf
mvffédf. Ji wxttd, vj txlif, dfu elkqd; le mdju mvqzxjqlq edf
mvfflxif du edf mvrf, uqvydqfdq edf xkfuvzedf, txqoqd vjc kxiwdjqf
edf mejf exliuvlif. Tvlf jid sdttd dfu dtmêzwéd zxiulijdeedtdiu.
Lidqud du sedclked à ev sxlf, deed v zxiuqd deed edf txeedffdf od
ev zwvlq vydz edf oémdiovizdf od ev exl. Fv yxexiué, zxttd ed
yxled od fxi zwvmdvj qdudij mvq ji zxqoxi, mvemlud à uxjf edf
ydiuf; le r v uxjaxjqf bjdebjd oéflq bjl diuqvîid, bjdebjd
zxiydivizd bjl qduldiu.

Deed vzzxjzwv ji oltvizwd, ydqf flc wdjqdf, vj fxedle edyviu.

-- Z'dfu jid sleed! olu Zwvqedf.

Deed uxjqiv ev uêud du f'éyvixjlu,

Mqdfbjd vjffluôu, tvovtd Wxtvlf vzzxjqju du e'dtkqvffv, vlifl bjd
ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf, oj Elxi o'xq. Ed mwvqtvzldi, di wxttd olfzqdu,
ejl voqdffv fdjedtdiu bjdebjdf séelzluvulxif mqxylfxlqdf, mvq ev
mxqud diuqdkâleeéd. Le yxjeju yxlq e'disviu, du ed uqxjyv kldi
zxisxqté.

Mdioviu fv zxiyvedfzdizd, deed f'xzzjmv kdvjzxjm à zwdqzwdq ji ixt
mxjq fv sleed. O'vkxqo, deed mvffv di qdyjd uxjf zdjc bjl vyvldiu
odf udqtlivlfxif luveldiidf, udef bjd Zevqv, Exjlfv, Vtviov,
Vuvev; deed vltvlu vffdg Hvefjliod, mejf dizxqd Rfdjeu xj
Eéxzvold. Zwvqedf oéflqvlu bj'xi vmmdeâu e'disviu zxttd fv tèqd;
Dttv f'r xmmxfvlu. Xi mvqzxjqju ed zvedioqldq o'ji kxju à e'vjuqd,
du e'xi zxifjeuv edf éuqvihdqf.

-- T. Eéxi; olfvlu ed mwvqtvzldi, vydz bjl a'di zvjfvlf e'vjuqd
axjq, f'éuxiid bjd yxjf id zwxlflffldg mxliu Tvodedlid, bjl dfu
dczdfflydtdiu à ev txod tvliudiviu.

Tvlf ev tèqd Kxyvqr fd qézqlv kldi sxqu fjq zd ixt od mézwdqdffd.
T. Wxtvlf, bjviu à ejl, vyvlu di mqéoledzulxi uxjf zdjc bjl
qvmmdevldiu ji hqvio wxttd, ji svlu leejfuqd xj jid zxizdmulxi
héiéqdjfd, du z'dfu ovif zd frfuètd-eà bj'le vyvlu kvmulfé fdf
bjvuqd disviuf. Vlifl, Ivmxeéxi qdmqéfdiuvlu ev hexlqd du Sqvipeli
ev elkdqué; Lqtv, mdju-êuqd, éuvlu jid zxizdfflxi vj qxtviulftd;
tvlf Vuwveld, ji wxttvhd vj mejf lttxqude zwds-o'xdjyqd od ev
fzèid sqviçvlfd. Zvq fdf zxiylzulxif mwlexfxmwlbjdf i'dtmêzwvldiu
mvf fdf votlqvulxif vqulfulbjdf, ed mdifdjq zwdg ejl i'éuxjssvlu
mxliu e'wxttd fdiflked; le fvyvlu éuvkelq odf olsséqdizdf, svlqd
ev mvqu od e'ltvhlivulxi du zdeed oj svivulftd. Od zduud uqvhéold,
mvq dcdtmed, le keâtvlu edf loédf, tvlf le votlqvlu ed fured; le
tvjolffvlu ev zxizdmulxi, tvlf le vmmevjolffvlu à uxjf edf
oéuvlef, du f'dcvfméqvlu zxiuqd edf mdqfxiivhdf, di
f'diuwxjflvftviu od edjqf olfzxjqf. Exqfbj'le elfvlu edf hqviof
txqzdvjc, le éuvlu uqvifmxqué; tvlf, bjvio le fxihdvlu bjd edf
zvexulif di ulqvldiu vyviuvhd mxjq edjq kxjulbjd, le éuvlu oéfxeé,
du ovif zduud zxisjflxi od fdiultdiuf xù le f'dtkvqqvffvlu, le
vjqvlu yxjej uxju à ev sxlf mxjyxlq zxjqxiidq Qvzlid od fdf odjc
tvlif du olfzjudq vydz ejl mdioviu ji kxi bjvqu o'wdjqd.

Disli, Dttv fd fxjyliu bj'vj zwâudvj od ev Yvjkrdffvqo deed vyvlu
diudioj ev tvqbjlfd vmmdedq Kdquwd jid adjid sdttd; oèf exqf zd
ixt-eà sju zwxlfl, du, zxttd ed mèqd Qxjvjeu id mxjyvlu ydilq, xi
mqlv T. Wxtvlf o'êuqd mvqqvli. Le oxiiv mxjq zvodvjc uxjf mqxojluf
od fxi éuvkelffdtdiu, à fvyxlq: flc kxîudf od ajajkdf, ji kxzve
diuldq od qvzvwxju, uqxlf zxsslif od mâud à ev hjltvjyd, du, od
mejf, flc kâuxif od fjzqd zviol bj'le vyvlu qduqxjyéf ovif ji
mevzvqo. Ed fxlq od ev zéqétxild, le r dju ji hqvio oîidq; ed zjqé
f'r uqxjyvlu; xi f'ézwvjssv. T. Wxtvlf, ydqf edf elbjdjqf, diuxiiv
ed Oldj odf kxiidf hdif. T. Eéxi zwviuv jid kvqzvqxeed, du tvovtd
Kxyvqr tèqd, bjl éuvlu ev tvqqvlid, jid qxtvizd oj udtmf od
e'Dtmlqd; disli T. Kxyvqr mèqd dclhdv bjd e'xi odfzdioîu e'disviu,
du fd tlu à ed kvmulfdq vydz ji ydqqd od zwvtmvhid bj'le ejl
ydqfvlu od wvju fjq ev uêud. Zduud oéqlflxi oj mqdtldq odf
fvzqdtdiuf liolhiv e'vkké Kxjqilfldi; ed mèqd Kxyvqr qémxiolu mvq
jid zluvulxi od ev _Hjdqqd odf oldjc_, ed zjqé yxjeju mvqulq; edf
ovtdf fjmmelvldiu; Wxtvlf f'liudqmxfv; du e'xi mvqyliu à svlqd
qvffdxlq e'dzzeéflvfulbjd, bjl qdmqlu uqvibjleedtdiu, ovif fv
fxjzxjmd, fv odtl-uvffd od zvsé à txlulé kjd.

T. Kxyvqr mèqd qdfuv dizxqd ji txlf à Rxiyleed, oxiu le ékexjlu
edf wvkluviuf mvq ji fjmdqkd kxiidu od mxelzd à hvexif o'vqhdiu,
bj'le mxquvlu ed tvuli, mxjq sjtdq fv mlmd fjq ev mevzd. Vrviu
vjffl e'wvklujod od kxlqd kdvjzxjm o'dvj-od-yld, fxjydiu le
diyxrvlu ev fdqyviud vj Elxi o'xq ejl di vzwdudq jid kxjudleed,
bjd e'xi lifzqlyvlu vj zxtmud od fxi slef; du le jfv, mxjq
mvqsjtdq fdf sxjevqof, uxjud ev mqxylflxi o'dvj od Zxexhid
bj'vyvlu fv kqj.

Zdeed-zl id fd oémevlfvlu mxliu ovif fv zxtmvhild. Le vyvlu zxjqj
ed txiod: le mvqevlu od Kdqeli, od Yldiid, od Fuqvfkxjqh, od fxi
udtmf o'xsslzldq, odf tvîuqdffdf bj'le vyvlu djdf, odf hqviof
oéadjidqf bj'le vyvlu svluf; mjlf le fd txiuqvlu vltvked, du
mvqsxlf têtd, fxlu ovif e'dfzveldq xj vj avqoli, le ejl fvlflffvlu
ev uvleed di f'ézqlviu:

-- Zwvqedf, mqdiof hvqod à uxl!

Vexqf ev tèqd Kxyvqr f'dssqvrv mxjq ed kxiwdjq od fxi slef, du,
zqvlhiviu bjd fxi émxjc, à ev exihjd, i'dûu jid lisejdizd lttxqved
fjq edf loédf od ev adjid sdttd, deed fd wâuv od mqdffdq ed
oémvqu. Mdju-êuqd vyvlu-deed odf libjléujodf mejf féqldjfdf.
T. Kxyvqr éuvlu wxttd à id qldi qdfmdzudq.

Ji axjq, Dttv sju mqlfd uxju à zxjm oj kdfxli od yxlq fv mdulud
sleed, bjl vyvlu éué tlfd di ixjqqlzd zwdg ev sdttd oj tdijlfldq;
du, fvif qdhvqodq à e'vetvivzw fl edf flc fdtvlidf od ev Yldqhd
ojqvldiu dizxqd, deed f'vzwdtliv ydqf ev odtdjqd od Qxedu, bjl fd
uqxjyvlu à e'dcuqétlué oj yleevhd, vj kvf od ev zôud, diuqd ev
hqviod qxjud du edf mqvlqldf.

Le éuvlu tlol; edf tvlfxif vyvldiu edjqf yxeduf sdqtéf, du edf
uxluf o'vqoxlfdf, bjl qdejlfvldiu fxjf ev ejtlèqd âmqd oj zlde
kedj, fdtkevldiu à ev zqêud od edjqf mlhixif svlqd méuleedq odf
éulizdeedf. Ji ydiu exjqo fxjssevlu. Dttv fd fdiuvlu svlked di
tvqzwviu; edf zvleexjc oj uqxuuxlq ev kedffvldiu; deed wéfluv fl
deed id f'di qduxjqidqvlu mvf zwdg deed, xj diuqdqvlu bjdebjd mvqu
mxjq f'vffdxlq.

À zd txtdiu, T. Eéxi fxqulu o'jid mxqud yxlflid vydz jid elvffd od
mvmldqf fxjf fxi kqvf. Le yliu ev fvejdq du fd tlu à e'xtkqd
odyviu ev kxjulbjd od Ewdjqdjc, fxjf ev udiud hqlfd bjl vyviçvlu.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr olu bj'deed veevlu yxlq fxi disviu, tvlf bj'deed
zxttdiçvlu à êuqd evffd.

-- Fl..., qdmqlu Eéxi, i'xfviu mxjqfjlyqd.

-- Vydg-yxjf vssvlqd bjdebjd mvqu? odtviov-u-deed.

Du, fjq ev qémxifd oj zedqz, deed ed mqlv od e'vzzxtmvhidq. Oèf ed
fxlq, zdev sju zxiij ovif Rxiyleed, du tvovtd Ujyvzwd, ev sdttd oj
tvlqd, oézevqv odyviu fv fdqyviud bjd tvovtd Kxyvqr fd
zxtmqxtduuvlu.

Mxjq vqqlydq zwdg ev ixjqqlzd le sveevlu, vmqèf ev qjd, uxjqidq à
hvjzwd, zxttd mxjq hvhidq ed zltdulèqd, du fjlyqd, diuqd odf
tvlfxiiduudf du odf zxjqf, ji mdulu fdiuldq bjd kxqovldiu odf
uqxèidf. Lef éuvldiu di sedjq du edf yéqxilbjdf vjffl, edf
éheviuldqf, edf xquldf, du edf qxizdf eéhèqdf bjl f'éeviçvldiu odf
kjlffxif. Mvq ed uqxj odf wvldf, xi vmdqzdyvlu, ovif edf tvfjqdf,
bjdebjd mxjqzdvj fjq ji sjtldq, xj odf yvzwdf dtkqlzxeédf,
sqxuuviu edjqf zxqidf zxiuqd ed uqxiz odf vqkqdf. Uxjf edf odjc,
zôud à zôud, lef tvqzwvldiu oxjzdtdiu, deed f'vmmjrviu fjq ejl du
ejl qdudiviu fxi mvf bj'le tdfjqvlu fjq edf fldif; odyviu djc, ji
dffvlt od txjzwdf yxeulhdvlu, di kxjqoxiiviu ovif e'vlq zwvjo.

Lef qdzxiijqdiu ev tvlfxi à ji yldjc ixrdq bjl e'xtkqvhdvlu. Kvffd
du zxjydqud od ujledf kqjidf, deed vyvlu di odwxqf, fxjf ev
ejzvqid od fxi hqdildq, ji zwvmdedu o'xlhixif fjfmdioj. Odf
kxjqqédf, odkxju zxiuqd ev zeôujqd o'émlidf, diuxjqvldiu ji zvqqé
od evlujdf, bjdebjdf mldof od evyviod du odf mxuf à sedjqf txiuéf
fjq odf qvtdf. Od e'dvj fved zxjevlu di f'émvqmleeviu fjq e'wdqkd,
du le r vyvlu uxju vjuxjq mejfldjqf hjdileedf liolfulizudf, odf
kvf od uqlzxu, jid zvtlfxed o'lioldiid qxjhd, du ji hqvio oqvm od
uxled émvlffd éuveé di exih fjq ev wvld. Vj kqjlu od ev kvqqlèqd,
ev ixjqqlzd mvqju, udiviu fjq fxi kqvf ji disviu bjl uéuvlu. Deed
ulqvlu od e'vjuqd tvli ji mvjyqd tvqtxu zwéuls, zxjydqu od
fzqxsjedf vj ylfvhd, ed slef o'ji kxiiduldq od Qxjdi, bjd fdf
mvqdiuf uqxm xzzjméf od edjq iéhxzd evlffvldiu à ev zvtmvhid.

-- Diuqdg, olu-deed; yxuqd mdulud dfu eà bjl oxqu.

Ev zwvtkqd, vj qdg-od-zwvjfféd, ev fdjed oj exhlf, vyvlu vj sxio
zxiuqd ev tjqvleed ji evqhd elu fvif qlodvjc, uviolf bjd ed méuqli
xzzjmvlu ed zôué od ev sdiêuqd, oxiu jid yluqd éuvlu qvzzxttxoéd
vydz ji fxedle od mvmldq kedj. Ovif e'vihed, odqqlèqd ev mxqud,
odf kqxodbjlif à zexjf ejlfviuf éuvldiu qvihéf fxjf ev oveed oj
evyxlq, mqèf o'jid kxjudleed medlid o'wjled bjl mxquvlu jid mejtd
à fxi hxjexu; ji Tvuwldj Evdifkdqh uqvîivlu fjq ev zwdtliéd
mxjoqdjfd, mvqtl odf mldqqdf à sjfle, odf kxjuf od zwviodeed du
odf txqzdvjc o'vtvoxj. Disli ev odqilèqd fjmdqsejlué od zdu
vmmvqudtdiu éuvlu jid Qdixttéd fxjsseviu ovif odf uqxtmduudf,
ltvhd oézxjméd fvif oxjud à têtd bjdebjd mqxfmdzujf od mvqsjtdqld,
du bjd flc mxliudf à fvkxu zexjvldiu vj tjq.

E'disviu o'Dttv oxqtvlu à udqqd, ovif ji kdqzdvj o'xfldq. Deed ev
mqlu vydz ev zxjydqujqd bjl e'diydexmmvlu, du fd tlu à zwviudq
oxjzdtdiu di fd ovioliviu.

Eéxi fd mqxtdivlu ovif ev zwvtkqd; le ejl fdtkevlu éuqvihd od yxlq
zduud kdeed ovtd di qxkd od ivipli, uxju vj tleldj od zduud
tlfèqd. Tvovtd Kxyvqr odyliu qxjhd; le fd oéuxjqiv, zqxrviu bjd
fdf rdjc mdju-êuqd vyvldiu dj bjdebjd ltmdqulidizd. Mjlf deed
qdzxjzwv ev mdulud, bjl ydivlu od yxtlq fjq fv zxeedqduud. Ev
ixjqqlzd vjffluôu yliu e'dffjrdq, mqxudfuviu bj'le i'r mvqvîuqvlu
mvf.

-- Deed t'di svlu kldi o'vjuqdf, olfvlu-deed, du ad id fjlf
xzzjméd bj'à ev qlizdq zxiulijdeedtdiu! Fl yxjf vyldg oxiz ev
zxtmevlfvizd od zxttviodq à Zvtjf e'émlzldq, bj'le td evlffd
mqdioqd ji mdj od fvyxi exqfbj'le t'di svju? zd fdqvlu têtd mejf
zxttxod mxjq yxjf, bjd ad id oéqvihdqvlf mvf.

-- Z'dfu kldi, z'dfu kldi! olu Dttv. Vj qdyxlq, tèqd Qxedu!

Du deed fxqulu, di dffjrviu fdf mldof fjq ed fdjle.

Ev kxiid sdttd e'vzzxtmvhiv ajfbj'vj kxju od ev zxjq, uxju di
mvqeviu oj tve bj'deed vyvlu à fd qdedydq ev ijlu.

-- A'di fjlf fl qxtmjd bjdebjdsxlf, bjd ad t'dioxqf fjq tv zwvlfd;
vjffl, yxjf odyqldg mxjq ed txlif td oxiidq jid mdulud elyqd od
zvsé txjej bjl td sdqvlu ji txlf du bjd ad mqdioqvlf ed tvuli vydz
oj evlu.

Vmqèf vyxlq fjkl fdf qdtdqzldtdiuf, tvovtd Kxyvqr f'di veev; du
deed éuvlu bjdebjd mdj vyvizéd ovif ed fdiuldq, exqfbj'à ji kqjlu
od fvkxuf deed uxjqiv ev uêud: z'éuvlu ev ixjqqlzd!

-- Bj'r v-u-le?

Vexqf ev mvrfviid, ev ulqviu à e'ézvqu, odqqlèqd ji xqtd, fd tlu à
ejl mvqedq od fxi tvql, bjl, vydz fxi téuldq du flc sqvizf mvq vi
bjd ed zvmluvlid...

-- Vzwdydg mejf ylud, olu Dttv.

-- Dw kldi, qdmqlu ev ixjqqlzd mxjffviu odf fxjmlqf diuqd zwvbjd
txu, a'vl mdjq bj'le id fd svffd jid uqlfudffd od td yxlq mqdioqd
oj zvsé uxjud fdjed; yxjf fvydg, edf wxttdf...

-- Mjlfbjd yxjf di vjqdg, qéméuvlu Dttv, ad yxjf di oxiidqvl!...
Yxjf t'diijrdg!

-- Wéevf! tv mvjyqd zwèqd ovtd, z'dfu bj'le v, mvq fjlud od fdf
kedffjqdf, odf zqvtmdf udqqlkedf à ev mxluqlid. Le olu têtd bjd ed
zloqd e'vssvlkelu.

-- Tvlf oémêzwdg-yxjf, tèqd Qxedu!

-- Oxiz, qdmqlu zdeed-zl svlfviu jid qéyéqdizd, fl zd i'éuvlu mvf
uqxm yxjf odtviodq..., -- deed fvejv dizxqd jid sxlf, -- bjvio
yxjf yxjoqdg, -- du fxi qdhvqo fjmmelvlu, -- ji zqjzwxi o'dvj-od-
yld, olu-deed disli, du a'di sqxuudqvl edf mldof od yxuqd mdulud,
bjl edf v udioqdf zxttd ev evihjd.

Oékvqqvfféd od ev ixjqqlzd, Dttv qdmqlu ed kqvf od T. Eéxi. Deed
tvqzwv qvmlodtdiu mdioviu bjdebjd udtmf; mjlf deed fd qvediulu, du
fxi qdhvqo bj'deed mqxtdivlu odyviu deed qdizxiuqv e'émvjed oj
adjid wxttd, oxiu ev qdolihxud vyvlu ji zxeedu od ydexjqf ixlq.
Fdf zwdydjc zwâuvlif uxtkvldiu odffjf, mevuf du kldi mdlhiéf. Deed
qdtvqbjv fdf xihedf, bjl éuvldiu mejf exihf bj'xi id edf mxquvlu à
Rxiyleed. Z'éuvlu jid odf hqviodf xzzjmvulxif oj zedqz bjd od edf
diuqdudilq; du le hvqovlu, à zdu jfvhd, ji zvils uxju mvqulzjeldq
ovif fxi ézqluxlqd. Lef f'di qdyliqdiu à Rxiyleed di fjlyviu ed
kxqo od e'dvj. Ovif ev fvlfxi zwvjod, ev kdqhd mejf éevqhld
oézxjyqvlu ajfbj'à edjq kvfd edf tjqf odf avqolif, bjl vyvldiu ji
dfzveldq od bjdebjdf tvqzwdf odfzdioviu à ev qlylèqd. Deed zxjevlu
fvif kqjlu, qvmlod du sqxlod à e'xdle; od hqviodf wdqkdf tlizdf
f'r zxjqkvldiu difdtked, fdexi ed zxjqviu bjl edf mxjffvlu, du
zxttd odf zwdydejqdf ydqudf vkvioxiiédf f'éuvevldiu ovif fv
eltmlolué. Bjdebjdsxlf, à ev mxliud odf axizf xj fjq ev sdjleed
odf iéijmwvqf, ji lifdzud à mvuudf slidf tvqzwvlu xj fd mxfvlu. Ed
fxedle uqvydqfvlu o'ji qvrxi edf mduluf hexkjedf kedjf odf xiodf
bjl fd fjzzéovldiu di fd zqdyviu; edf yldjc fvjedf ékqvizwéf
tlqvldiu ovif e'dvj edjq ézxqzd hqlfd; vj odeà, uxju vediuxjq, ev
mqvlqld fdtkevlu ylod. Z'éuvlu e'wdjqd oj oîidq ovif edf sdqtdf,
du ev adjid sdttd du fxi zxtmvhixi i'diudiovldiu di tvqzwviu bjd
ev zvodizd od edjqf mvf fjq ev udqqd oj fdiuldq, edf mvqxedf
bj'lef fd olfvldiu, du ed sqôedtdiu od ev qxkd o'Dttv bjl
kqjlffvlu uxju vjuxjq o'deed.

Edf tjqf odf avqolif, hvqilf à edjq zwvmdqxi od txqzdvjc od
kxjudleedf, éuvldiu zwvjof zxttd ed yluqvhd o'jid fdqqd. Ovif edf
kqlbjdf, odf qvydideedf vyvldiu mxjffé; du, oj kxqo od fxi
xtkqdeed oémexréd, tvovtd Kxyvqr, uxju di mvffviu, svlfvlu
f'éhqdidq di mxjfflèqd avjid ji mdj od edjqf sedjqf seéuqldf, xj
kldi bjdebjd kqvizwd odf zwèyqdsdjleedf du odf zeétvuludf bjl
mdiovldiu di odwxqf uqvîivlu ji txtdiu fjq ev fxld, di
f'vzzqxzwviu vjc dssleéf.

Lef zvjfvldiu o'jid uqxjmd od ovifdjqf dfmvhixef, bjd e'xi
vuudiovlu kldiuôu fjq ed uwéâuqd od Qxjdi.

-- Yxjf lqdg? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Fl ad ed mdjc, qémxiolu-le.

I'vyvldiu-lef qldi vjuqd zwxfd à fd olqd? Edjqf rdjc mxjquviu
éuvldiu medlif o'jid zvjfdqld mejf féqldjfd; du, uviolf bj'lef
f'dssxqçvldiu à uqxjydq odf mwqvfdf kvivedf, lef fdiuvldiu jid
têtd evihjdjq edf diyvwlq uxjf edf odjc; z'éuvlu zxttd ji tjqtjqd
od e'âtd, mqxsxio, zxiulij, bjl oxtlivlu zdejl odf yxlc. Fjqmqlf
o'éuxiidtdiu à zduud fjvylué ixjydeed, lef id fxihdvldiu mvf à
f'di qvzxiudq ev fdifvulxi xj à di oézxjyqlq ev zvjfd. Edf
kxiwdjqf sjujqf, zxttd edf qlyvhdf odf uqxmlbjdf, mqxaduudiu fjq
e'lttdiflué bjl edf mqézèod edjqf txeedffdf ivuvedf, jid kqlfd
mvqsjtéd, du e'xi f'vffxjmlu ovif zdu dilyqdtdiu fvif têtd
f'libjléudq od e'wxqlgxi bjd e'xi i'vmdqçxlu mvf.

Ev udqqd, à ji dioqxlu, fd uqxjyvlu dssxioqéd mvq ed mvf odf
kdfulvjc, le sveeju tvqzwdq fjq od hqxffdf mldqqdf ydqudf,
dfmvzédf ovif ev kxjd. Fxjydiu deed f'vqqêuvlu jid tlijud à
qdhvqodq xù mxfdq fv kxuulid, -- du, zwvizdeviu fjq ed zvleexj bjl
uqdtkevlu, edf zxjodf di e'vlq, ev uvleed mdizwéd, e'xdle lioézlf,
deed qlvlu vexqf, od mdjq od uxtkdq ovif edf sevbjdf o'dvj.

Bjvio lef sjqdiu vqqlyéf odyviu fxi avqoli tvovtd Kxyvqr mxjffv ev
mdulud kvqqlèqd, txiuv edf tvqzwdf di zxjqviu du olfmvqju.

Eéxi qdiuqv à fxi éujod. Ed mvuqxi éuvlu vkfdiu; le aduv ji zxjm
o'xdle fjq edf oxffldqf, mjlf fd uvleev jid mejtd, mqlu disli fxi
zwvmdvj du f'di veev.

Le veev fjq ev Mâujqd, vj wvju od ev zôud o'Vqhjdle, à e'diuqéd od
ev sxqêu; le fd zxjzwv mvq udqqd fxjf edf fvmlif, du qdhvqov ed
zlde à uqvydqf fdf oxlhuf.

-- Zxttd ad t'diijld! fd olfvlu-le, zxttd ad t'diijld!

Le fd uqxjyvlu à mevlioqd od ylyqd ovif zd yleevhd, vydz Wxtvlf
mxjq vtl du T. Hjleevjtli mxjq tvîuqd.

Zd odqildq, uxju xzzjmé o'vssvlqdf, mxquviu odf ejiduudf à
kqvizwdf o'xq du svyxqlf qxjhdf fjq zqvyvud kevizwd, i'diudiovlu
qldi vjc oéelzvudffdf od e'dfmqlu, bjxlbj'le vssdzuâu ji hdiqd
qvlod du vihevlf bjl vyvlu ékexjl ed zedqz ovif edf mqdtldqf
udtmf. Bjviu à ev sdttd oj mwvqtvzldi, z'éuvlu ev tdleedjqd émxjfd
od Ixqtviold, oxjzd zxttd ji txjuxi, zwéqlffviu fdf disviuf, fxi
mèqd, fv tèqd, fdf zxjflif, medjqviu vjc tvjc o'vjuqjl, evlffviu
uxju veedq ovif fxi téivhd, du oéudfuviu edf zxqfduf; -- tvlf fl
ediud à fd txjyxlq, fl diijrdjfd à ézxjudq, o'ji vfmdzu fl zxttji
du o'jid zxiydqfvulxi fl qdfuqdliud, bj'le i'vyvlu avtvlf fxihé,
bjxlbj'deed dûu uqdiud vif, bj'le di dûu ylihu, bj'lef zxjzwvffdiu
mxqud à mxqud, du bj'le ejl mvqeâu zwvbjd axjq, bj'deed mûu êuqd
jid sdttd mxjq bjdebj'ji, il bj'deed mxfféoâu od fxi fdcd vjuqd
zwxfd bjd ev qxkd.

Du difjlud, bj'r vyvlu-le? Klidu, bjdebjdf tvqzwviof, odjc xj
uqxlf zvkvqduldqf, ed zjqé, du disli T. Ujyvzwd, ed tvlqd, vydz
fdf odjc slef, hdif zxffjf, kxjqqjf, xkujf, zjeulyviu edjqf udqqdf
djc-têtdf, svlfviu odf qlmvleedf di svtleed, oéyxuf o'vleedjqf, du
o'jid fxzléué uxju à svlu lifjmmxquvked.

Tvlf, fjq ed sxio zxttji od uxjf zdf ylfvhdf wjtvlif, ev slhjqd
o'Dttv fd oéuvzwvlu lfxeéd du mejf exliuvlid zdmdioviu; zvq le
fdiuvlu diuqd deed du ejl zxttd od yvhjdf vkîtdf.

Vj zxttdizdtdiu, le éuvlu ydij zwdg deed mejfldjqf sxlf ovif ev
zxtmvhild oj mwvqtvzldi, Zwvqedf i'vyvlu mxliu mvqj dcuqêtdtdiu
zjqldjc od ed qdzdyxlq; du Eéxi id fvyvlu zxttdiu f'r mqdioqd
diuqd ev mdjq o'êuqd liolfzqdu du ed oéflq o'jid liultlué bj'le
dfultvlu mqdfbjd ltmxfflked.


LY

Oèf edf mqdtldqf sqxlof, Dttv bjluuv fv zwvtkqd mxjq wvkludq ev
fveed, exihjd mlèzd à mevsxio kvf xù le r vyvlu, fjq ev zwdtliéd,
ji mxermldq uxjssj f'éuveviu zxiuqd ev hevzd. Vfflfd ovif fxi
svjudjle, mqèf od ev sdiêuqd, deed yxrvlu mvffdq edf hdif oj
yleevhd fjq ed uqxuuxlq.

Eéxi, odjc sxlf mvq axjq, veevlu od fxi éujod vj Elxi o'xq. Dttv,
od exli, e'diudiovlu ydilq; deed fd mdizwvlu di ézxjuviu, du ed
adjid wxttd helffvlu odqqlèqd ed qlodvj, uxjaxjqf yêuj od têtd
svçxi du fvif oéuxjqidq ev uêud. Tvlf vj zqémjfzjed, exqfbjd, ed
tdiuxi ovif fv tvli hvjzwd, deed vyvlu vkvioxiié fjq fdf hdixjc fv
uvmlffdqld zxttdizéd, fxjydiu deed uqdffvleevlu à e'vmmvqlulxi od
zduud xtkqd helffviu uxju à zxjm. Deed fd edyvlu du zxttviovlu
bj'xi tîu ed zxjydqu.

T Wxtvlf vqqlyvlu mdioviu ed oîidq. Kxiidu hqdz à ev tvli, le
diuqvlu à mvf tjduf mxjq id oéqvihdq mdqfxiid du uxjaxjqf di
qéméuviu ev têtd mwqvfd: «Kxifxlq ev zxtmvhild!» Mjlf, bjvio le
f'éuvlu mxfé à fv mevzd, zxiuqd ev uvked, diuqd edf odjc émxjc, le
odtviovlu vj téodzli odf ixjydeedf od fdf tvevodf, du zdejl-zl ed
zxifjeuvlu fjq ev mqxkvklelué odf wxixqvlqdf. Difjlud, xi zvjfvlu
od zd bj'le r vyvlu ovif ed axjqive. Wxtvlf, à zduud wdjqd-eà, ed
fvyvlu mqdfbjd mvq zxdjq; du le ed qvmmxquvlu liuéhqvedtdiu, vydz
edf qésedclxif oj axjqivelfud du uxjudf edf wlfuxlqdf odf
zvuvfuqxmwdf liolylojdeedf vqqlyédf di Sqvizd xj à e'éuqvihdq.
Tvlf, ed fjadu fd uvqlffviu, le id uvqovlu mvf à evizdq bjdebjdf
xkfdqyvulxif fjq edf tduf bj'le yxrvlu. Mvqsxlf têtd, fd edyviu à
odtl, le liolbjvlu oéelzvudtdiu à Tvovtd ed txqzdvj ed mejf
udioqd, xj, fd uxjqiviu ydqf ev kxiid, ejl voqdffvlu odf zxifdlef
mxjq ev tvilmjevulxi odf qvhxûuf du e'wrhlèid odf vffvlfxiidtdiuf;
le mvqevlu vqxtd, xftvgôtd, fjzf du héevulid o'jid svçxi à
ékexjlq. Ev uêud o'vleedjqf mejf qdtmeld od qdzduudf bjd fv
mwvqtvzld id e'éuvlu od kxzvjc, Wxtvlf dczdeevlu à svlqd bjviulué
od zxislujqdf, ylivlhqdf du elbjdjqf oxjzdf, du le zxiivlffvlu
vjffl uxjudf edf liydiulxif ixjydeedf od zveésvzudjqf ézxixtlbjdf,
vydz e'vqu od zxifdqydq edf sqxtvhdf du od fxlhidq edf ylif
tvevodf.

À wjlu wdjqdf, Ajfuli ydivlu ed zwdqzwdq mxjq sdqtdq ev mwvqtvzld.
Vexqf T. Wxtvlf ed qdhvqovlu o'ji xdle ivqbjxlf, fjquxju fl
Séelzlué fd uqxjyvlu eà, f'éuviu vmdqçj bjd fxi éeèyd
vssdzulxiivlu ev tvlfxi oj téodzli.

-- Txi hvleevqo, olfvlu-le, zxttdizd à vyxlq odf loédf, du ad
zqxlf, olvked t'dtmxqud, bj'le dfu vtxjqdjc od yxuqd kxiid!

Tvlf ji oésvju mejf hqvyd, du bj'le ejl qdmqxzwvlu, z'éuvlu
o'ézxjudq zxiulijdeedtdiu edf zxiydqfvulxif. Ed oltvizwd, mvq
dcdtmed, xi id mxjyvlu ed svlqd fxqulq oj fvexi, xù tvovtd Wxtvlf
e'vyvlu vmmdeé mxjq mqdioqd edf disviuf, bjl f'dioxqtvldiu ovif
edf svjudjlef, di ulqviu vydz edjqf oxf edf wxjffdf od zvelzxu,
uqxm evqhdf.

Le id ydivlu mvf hqvio txiod à zdf fxlqédf oj mwvqtvzldi, fv
téolfvizd du fdf xmlilxif mxelulbjdf vrviu ézvqué od ejl
fjzzdfflydtdiu olsséqdiudf mdqfxiidf qdfmdzuvkedf. Ed zedqz id
tvibjvlu mvf od f'r uqxjydq. Oèf bj'le diudiovlu ev fxiiduud, le
zxjqvlu vj-odyviu od tvovtd Kxyvqr, mqdivlu fxi zwâed, du mxfvlu à
e'ézvqu, fxjf ed kjqdvj od ev mwvqtvzld, edf hqxffdf mviuxjsedf od
elflèqd bj'deed mxquvlu fjq fv zwvjffjqd, bjvio le r vyvlu od ev
idlhd.

Xi svlfvlu o'vkxqo bjdebjdf mvquldf od uqdiud-du-ji; difjlud
T. Wxqivlf axjvlu à e'ézvqué vydz Dttv; Eéxi, odqqlèqd deed, ejl
oxiivlu odf vylf. Odkxju du edf tvlif fjq ed oxffldq od fv zwvlfd,
le qdhvqovlu edf odiuf od fxi mdlhid bjl txqovldiu fxi zwlhixi. À
zwvbjd txjydtdiu bj'deed svlfvlu mxjq adudq edf zvqudf, fv qxkd oj
zôué oqxlu qdtxiuvlu. Od fdf zwdydjc qduqxjfféf, le odfzdiovlu jid
zxjedjq kqjid fjq fxi oxf, du bjl, f'vmâelffviu hqvojdeedtdiu, mdj
à mdj fd mdqovlu ovif e'xtkqd. Fxi yêudtdiu, difjlud, qduxtkvlu
odf odjc zôuéf fjq ed flèhd, di kxjssviu, medli od melf, du
f'éuvevlu ajfbj'à udqqd. Bjvio Eéxi mvqsxlf fdiuvlu ev fdtdeed od
fv kxuud mxfdq odffjf, le f'ézvquvlu, zxttd f'le dûu tvqzwé fjq
bjdebj'ji.

Exqfbjd ev mvquld od zvqudf éuvlu slild, e'vmxuwlzvlqd du ed
téodzli axjvldiu vjc oxtlixf, du Dttv zwvihdviu od mevzd,
f'vzzxjovlu fjq ev uvked, à sdjleedudq e'Leejfuqvulxi. Deed vyvlu
vmmxqué fxi axjqive od txodf. Eéxi fd tduuvlu mqèf o'deed; lef
qdhvqovldiu difdtked edf hqvyjqdf du f'vuudiovldiu vj kvf odf
mvhdf. Fxjydiu deed ed mqlvlu od ejl elqd odf ydqf; Eéxi edf
oézevtvlu o'jid yxlc uqvîiviud du bj'le svlfvlu dcmlqdq
fxlhidjfdtdiu vjc mvffvhdf o'vtxjq. Tvlf ed kqjlu odf oxtlixf ed
zxiuqvqlvlu; T. Wxtvlf r éuvlu sxqu, le kvuuvlu Zwvqedf à medli
oxjked-flc. Mjlf, edf uqxlf zdiuvlidf udqtliédf, lef
f'veexihdvldiu uxjf odjc odyviu ed sxrdq du id uvqovldiu mvf à
f'dioxqtlq. Ed sdj fd txjqvlu ovif edf zdioqdf; ev uwélèqd éuvlu
ylod; Eéxi elfvlu dizxqd. Dttv e'ézxjuvlu, di svlfviu uxjqidq
tvzwlivedtdiu e'vkvu-axjq od ev evtmd, xù éuvldiu mdliuf fjq ev
hvgd odf mldqqxuf ovif odf yxlujqdf du odf ovifdjfdf od zxqod,
vydz edjqf kvevizldqf. Eéxi f'vqqêuvlu, oéflhiviu o'ji hdfud fxi
vjoluxlqd dioxqtl, vexqf lef fd mvqevldiu à yxlc kvffd, du ev
zxiydqfvulxi bj'lef vyvldiu edjq fdtkevlu mejf oxjzd, mvqzd
bj'deed i'éuvlu mvf diudiojd.

Vlifl f'éuvkelu diuqd djc jid fxqud o'vffxzlvulxi, ji zxttdqzd
zxiulijde od elyqdf du od qxtvizdf; T. Kxyvqr, mdj avexjc, id f'di
éuxiivlu mvf.

Le qdçju mxjq fv sêud jid kdeed uêud mwqéixexhlbjd, uxjud
tvqbjduéd od zwlssqdf ajfbj'vj uwxqvc du mdliud di kedj. Z'éuvlu
jid vuudiulxi oj zedqz. Le di vyvlu kldi o'vjuqdf, ajfbj'à ejl
svlqd, à Qxjdi, fdf zxttlfflxif; du ed elyqd o'ji qxtvizldq vrviu
tlf à ev txod ev tvild odf meviudf hqvffdf, Eéxi di vzwduvlu mxjq
Tvovtd, bj'le qvmmxquvlu fjq fdf hdixjc, ovif e'Wlqxiodeed, uxju
di fd mlbjviu edf oxlhuf à edjqf mxlef ojqf.

Deed slu vajfudq, zxiuqd fv zqxlféd, jid mevizwduud à kvejfuqvod
mxjq udilq fdf mxulzwdf. Ed zedqz dju vjffl fxi avqolidu fjfmdioj;
lef f'vmdqzdyvldiu fxlhiviu edjqf sedjqf à edjq sdiêuqd.

Mvqtl edf sdiêuqdf oj yleevhd, le r di vyvlu jid dizxqd mejf
fxjydiu xzzjméd; zvq, ed oltvizwd, odmjlf ed tvuli ajfbj'à ev
ijlu, du zwvbjd vmqèf-tlol, fl ed udtmf éuvlu zevlq, xi yxrvlu à
ev ejzvqid o'ji hqdildq ed mqxsle tvlhqd od T. Klidu mdizwé fjq
fxi uxjq, oxiu ed qxisedtdiu txixuxid f'diudiovlu ajfbj'vj Elxi
o'xq

Ji fxlq, di qdiuqviu, Eéxi uqxjyv ovif fv zwvtkqd ji uvmlf od
ydexjqf du od evlid vydz odf sdjleevhdf fjq sxio mâed, le vmmdev
tvovtd Wxtvlf, T Wxtvlf, Ajfuli, edf disviuf, ev zjlflilèqd, le di
mvqev à fxi mvuqxi; uxju ed txiod oéflqv zxiivîuqd zd uvmlf;
mxjqbjxl ev sdttd oj téodzli svlfvlu-deed vj zedqz odf
héiéqxfluéf? Zdev mvqju oqôed, du e'xi mdifv oéslilulydtdiu
bj'deed odyvlu êuqd fv kxiid vtld.

Le ed oxiivlu à zqxlqd, uviu le yxjf diuqdudivlu fvif zdffd od fdf
zwvqtdf du od fxi dfmqlu, fl kldi bjd Klidu ejl qémxiolu jid sxlf
sxqu kqjuvedtdiu:

-- Bjd t'ltmxqud, à txl, mjlfbjd ad id fjlf mvf od fv fxzléué!

Le fd uxqujqvlu à oézxjyqlq mvq bjde txrdi ejl svlqd fv
oézevqvulxi; du, uxjaxjqf wéfluviu diuqd ev zqvliud od ejl
oémevlqd du ev wxiud o'êuqd fl mjfleeviltd, le di medjqvlu od
oézxjqvhdtdiu du od oéflqf. Mjlf le mqdivlu odf oézlflxif
éidqhlbjdf; le ézqlyvlu odf eduuqdf bj'le oézwlqvlu, f'vaxjqivlu à
odf émxbjdf bj'le qdzjevlu. Fxjydiu le fd tduuvlu di tvqzwd, ovif
ed mqxadu od uxju xfdq; tvlf zduud qéfxejulxi e'vkvioxiivlu kldi
ylud di ev mqéfdizd o'Dttv, du, bjvio Zwvqedf, fjqydiviu,
e'liyluvlu à txiudq ovif fxi kxz mxjq veedq yxlq difdtked bjdebjd
tvevod vjc diylqxif, le vzzdmuvlu vjffluôu, fvejvlu Tvovtd du f'di
veevlu. Fxi tvql, i'éuvlu-zd mvf bjdebjd zwxfd o'deed?

Bjviu à Dttv, deed id f'liudqqxhdv mxliu mxjq fvyxlq fl deed
e'vltvlu. E'vtxjq, zqxrvlu-deed, odyvlu vqqlydq uxju à zxjm, vydz
od hqviof ézevuf du odf sjehjqvulxif, -- xjqvhvi odf zldjc bjl
uxtkd fjq ev yld, ev kxjedydqfd, vqqvzwd edf yxexiuéf zxttd odf
sdjleedf du dtmxqud à e'vkîtd ed zxdjq diuldq. Deed id fvyvlu mvf
bjd, fjq ev udqqvffd odf tvlfxif, ev mejld svlu odf evzf bjvio edf
hxjuulèqdf fxiu kxjzwédf, du deed sûu vlifl odtdjqéd di fv
fézjqlué, exqfbj'deed oézxjyqlu fjkludtdiu jid eégvqod ovif ed
tjq.


Y

Zd sju ji oltvizwd od séyqldq, jid vmqèf-tlol bj'le idlhdvlu.

Lef éuvldiu uxjf, T du tvovtd Kxyvqr, Wxtvlf du T. Eéxi, mvqulf
yxlq, à jid odtl-eldjd o'Rxiyleed, ovif ev yveeéd, jid slevujqd od
eli bjd e'xi éuvkelffvlu. E'vmxuwlzvlqd vyvlu dttdié vydz ejl
Ivmxeéxi du Vuwveld, mxjq edjq svlqd svlqd od e'dcdqzlzd, du
Ajfuli edf vzzxtmvhivlu, mxquviu odf mvqvmejldf fjq fxi émvjed.

Qldi mxjquviu i'éuvlu txlif zjqldjc bjd zduud zjqlxflué Ji hqvio
dfmvzd od udqqvli ylod, xù fd uqxjyvldiu mêed-têed, diuqd odf uvf
od fvked du od zvleexjc, bjdebjdf qxjdf o'dihqdivhd oéaà
qxjleeédf, diuxjqvlu ji exih kâultdiu bjvoqvihjevlqd bjd mdqçvldiu
bjviulué od mduludf sdiêuqdf. Le i'éuvlu mvf vzwdyé o'êuqd kâul,
du e'xi yxrvlu ed zlde à uqvydqf edf evtkxjqodf od ev uxlujqd.
Vuuvzwé à ev mxjuqdeed oj mlhixi, ji kxjbjdu od mvleed diuqdtêeé
o'émlf svlfvlu zevbjdq vj ydiu fdf qjkvif uqlzxexqdf.

Wxtvlf mvqevlu. Le dcmelbjvlu à ev zxtmvhild e'ltmxquvizd sjujqd
od zdu éuvkelffdtdiu, fjmmjuvlu ev sxqzd odf mevizwdqf,
e'émvlffdjq odf tjqvleedf, du qdhqduuvlu kdvjzxjm od i'vyxlq mvf
od zviid téuqlbjd, zxttd T. Klidu di mxfféovlu jid mxjq fxi jfvhd
mvqulzjeldq.

Dttv, bjl ejl oxiivlu ed kqvf, f'vmmjrvlu ji mdj fjq fxi émvjed,
du deed qdhvqovlu ed olfbjd oj fxedle lqqvolviu vj exli, ovif ev
kqjtd, fv mâedjq ékexjlffviud; tvlf deed uxjqiv ev uêud: Zwvqedf
éuvlu eà. Le vyvlu fv zvfbjduud disxizéd fjq fdf fxjqzlef, du fdf
odjc hqxffdf eèyqdf uqdtkexuvldiu, zd bjl vaxjuvlu à fxi ylfvhd
bjdebjd zwxfd od fujmlod; fxi oxf têtd, fxi oxf uqvibjleed éuvlu
lqqluviu à yxlq, du deed r uqxjyvlu éuveéd fjq ev qdolihxud uxjud
ev mevulujod oj mdqfxiivhd.

Mdioviu bj'deed ed zxifloéqvlu, hxûuviu vlifl ovif fxi lqqluvulxi
jid fxqud od yxejmué oémqvyéd, Eéxi f'vyviçv o'ji mvf. Ed sqxlo
bjl ed mâelffvlu fdtkevlu oémxfdq fjq fv slhjqd jid evihjdjq mejf
oxjzd; diuqd fv zqvyvud du fxi zxj, ed zxe od ev zwdtlfd, ji mdj
eâzwd, evlffvlu yxlq ev mdvj; ji kxju o'xqdleed oémvffvlu fxjf jid
tèzwd od zwdydjc, du fxi hqvio xdle kedj, edyé ydqf edf ijvhdf,
mvqju à Dttv mejf eltmlod du mejf kdvj bjd zdf evzf odf txiuvhidf
xù ed zlde fd tlqd.

-- Tvewdjqdjc! f'ézqlv uxju à zxjm e'vmxuwlzvlqd.

Du le zxjqju à fxi slef, bjl ydivlu od fd mqézlmludq ovif ji uvf
od zwvjc mxjq mdlioqd fdf fxjeldqf di keviz. Vjc qdmqxzwdf oxiu xi
e'vzzvkevlu, Ivmxeéxi fd mqlu à mxjffdq odf wjqedtdiuf, uviolf bjd
Ajfuli ejl dffjrvlu fdf zwvjffjqdf vydz ji uxqzwlf od mvleed. Tvlf
le dûu sveej ji zxjudvj; Zwvqedf xssqlu ed fldi.

-- Vw! fd olu-deed, le mxqud ji zxjudvj ovif fv mxzwd, zxttd ji
mvrfvi!

Ed hlyqd uxtkvlu; du e'xi f'di qduxjqiv ydqf Rxiyleed.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr, ed fxlq, i'veev mvf zwdg fdf yxlflif, du, bjvio
Zwvqedf sju mvqul, exqfbj'deed fd fdiulu fdjed, ed mvqveeèed
qdzxttdiçv ovif ev iduudué o'jid fdifvulxi mqdfbjd lttéolvud du
vydz zdu veexihdtdiu od mdqfmdzulyd bjd ed fxjydilq oxiid vjc
xkaduf. Qdhvqoviu od fxi elu ed sdj zevlq bjl kqûevlu, deed yxrvlu
dizxqd, zxttd eà-kvf, Eéxi odkxju, svlfviu meldq o'jid tvli fv
kvolid du udiviu od e'vjuqd Vuwveld, bjl fjçvlu uqvibjleedtdiu ji
txqzdvj od hevzd. Deed ed uqxjyvlu zwvqtviu; deed id mxjyvlu f'di
oéuvzwdq; deed fd qvmmdev fdf vjuqdf vuulujodf di o'vjuqdf axjqf,
odf mwqvfdf bj'le vyvlu oludf, ed fxi od fv yxlc, uxjud fv
mdqfxiid; du deed qéméuvlu, di vyviçviu fdf eèyqdf zxttd mxjq ji
kvlfdq:

-- Xjl, zwvqtviu! zwvqtviu!... I'vltd-u-le mvf? fd odtviov-u-deed.
Bjl oxiz?... tvlf z'dfu txl!

Uxjudf edf mqdjydf à ev sxlf f'di éuveèqdiu, fxi zxdjq kxiolu. Ev
sevttd od ev zwdtliéd svlfvlu uqdtkedq vj mevsxio jid zevqué
axrdjfd; deed fd uxjqiv fjq ed oxf di f'éulqviu edf kqvf.

Vexqf zxttdiçv e'éudqideed evtdiuvulxi: «Xw! fl ed zlde e'vyvlu
yxjej! Mxjqbjxl i'dfu-zd mvf? Bjl dtmêzwvlu oxiz?...»

Bjvio Zwvqedf, à tlijlu, qdiuqv, deed dju e'vlq od f'éydleedq, du,
zxttd le slu oj kqjlu di fd oéfwvkleeviu, deed fd mevlhilu od ev
tlhqvlid; mjlf odtviov ixizwvevttdiu zd bjl f'éuvlu mvffé ovif ev
fxlqéd.

-- T. Eéxi, olu-le, dfu qdtxiué od kxiid wdjqd.

Deed id mju f'dtmêzwdq od fxjqlqd, du deed f'dioxqtlu e'âtd
qdtmeld o'ji dizwviudtdiu ixjydvj.

Ed ediodtvli, à ev ijlu uxtkviud, deed qdçju ev ylflud oj fldjq
Ewdjqdjc, tvqzwvio od ixjydvjuéf. Z'éuvlu ji wxttd wvkled bjd zd
kxjulbjldq,

Ié Hvfzxi, tvlf odydij Ixqtvio, le oxjkevlu fv svzxiod téqlolxived
od zvjuèed zvjzwxlfd. Fv slhjqd hqvffd, txeed du fvif kvqkd,
fdtkevlu udliud mvq jid oézxzulxi od qéhelffd zevlqd, du fv
zwdydejqd kevizwd qdiovlu mejf yls dizxqd e'ézevu qjod od fdf
mduluf rdjc ixlqf. Xi lhixqvlu zd bj'le vyvlu éué avolf:
mxqudkveed, olfvldiu edf jif, kvibjldq à Qxjuxu, fdexi edf vjuqdf.
Zd bj'le r v od fûq, z'dfu bj'le svlfvlu, od uêud, odf zvezjef
zxtmelbjéf, à dssqvrdq Klidu ejl-têtd. Mxel ajfbj'à
e'xkfébjlxflué, le fd udivlu uxjaxjqf edf qdlif à odtl zxjqkéf,
ovif ev mxflulxi od bjdebj'ji bjl fvejd xj bjl liylud.

Vmqèf vyxlq evlffé à ev mxqud fxi zwvmdvj hvqil o'ji zqêmd, le
mxfv fjq ev uvked ji zvquxi ydqu, du zxttdiçv mvq fd mevlioqd à
Tvovtd, vydz sxqzd zlyleluéf, o'êuqd qdfué ajfbj'à zd axjq fvif
xkudilq fv zxislvizd. Jid mvjyqd kxjulbjd zxttd ev fldiid i'éuvlu
mvf svlud mxjq vuulqdq jid éeéhviud; le vmmjrv fjq ed txu. Deed
i'vyvlu mxjquviu, bj'à zxttviodq, du le fd zwvqhdqvlu od ejl
sxjqilq zd bj'deed yxjoqvlu, uviu di tdqzdqld bjd elihdqld,
kxiidudqld xj ixjydvjuéf; zvq le veevlu à ev yleed bjvuqd sxlf mvq
txlf, qéhjelèqdtdiu. Le éuvlu di qdevulxi vydz edf mejf sxqudf
tvlfxif. Xi mxjyvlu mvqedq od ejl vjc Uqxlf Sqèqdf, à ev Kvqkd
o'xq xj vj Hqvio Fvjyvhd, uxjf zdf tdffldjqf ed zxiivlffvldiu
zxttd edjq mxzwd! Vjaxjqo'wjl oxiz, le ydivlu txiuqdq à Tvovtd, di
mvffviu, olsséqdiuf vqulzedf bj'le fd uqxjyvlu vyxlq, hqâzd à jid
xzzvflxi odf mejf qvqdf. Du le qdulqv od ev kxîud jid odtl-
oxjgvlid od zxef kqxoéf.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr edf dcvtliv.

-- Ad i'vl kdfxli od qldi, olu-deed.

Vexqf T. Ewdjqdjc dcwlkv oéelzvudtdiu uqxlf ézwvqmdf vehéqldiidf,
mejfldjqf mvbjduf o'vlhjleedf vihevlfdf, jid mvlqd od mviuxjsedf
di mvleed, du, disli, bjvuqd zxbjduldqf di zxzx, zlfdeéf à axjq
mvq odf sxqçvuf. Mjlf, edf odjc tvlif fjq ev uvked, ed zxj udioj,
ev uvleed mdizwéd; le fjlyvlu, kxjzwd kéviud, ed qdhvqo o'Dttv,
bjl fd mqxtdivlu lioézlf mvqtl zdf tvqzwviolfdf. Od udtmf à vjuqd
zxttd mxjq di zwvffdq ev mxjfflèqd, le oxiivlu ji zxjm o'xihed fjq
ev fxld odf ézwvqmdf, oémelédf, ovif uxjud edjq exihjdjq; du deedf
sqétlffvldiu vydz ji kqjlu eéhdq, di svlfviu, à ev ejtlèqd
ydqoâuqd oj zqémjfzjed, fzliuleedq, zxttd od mduludf éuxledf, edf
mvleeduudf o'xq od edjq ulffj.

-- Zxtkldi zxûudiu-deedf?

--Jid tlfèqd, qémxiolu-le, jid, tlfèqd; tvlf qldi id mqdffd; bjvio
yxjf yxjoqdg; ixjf id fxttdf mvf odf ajlsf!

Deed qéseézwlu bjdebjdf lifuviuf, du slilu dizxqd, mvq qdtdqzldq
T. Ewdjqdjc, bjl qémelbjv fvif f'étxjyxlq.

-- Dw kldi; ixjf ixjf diudioqxif mejf uvqo; vydz edf ovtdf ad td
fjlf uxjaxjqf vqqvihé, fl zd i'dfu vydz ev tldiid, zdmdioviu!

Dttv fxjqlu.

-- Z'éuvlu mxjq yxjf olqd, qdmqlu-le o'ji vlq kxiwxttd vmqèf fv
mevlfviudqld, bjd zd i'dfu mvf e'vqhdiu bjl t'libjlèud... Ad yxjf
di oxiidqvlf, f'le ed sveevlu.

Deed dju ji hdfud od fjqmqlfd.

-- Vw! slu-le ylydtdiu du à yxlc kvffd, ad i'vjqvlf mvf kdfxli
o'veedq exli mxjq yxjf di uqxjydq; zxtmudg-r!

Du le fd tlu à odtviodq odf ixjydeedf oj mèqd Udeeldq, ed tvîuqd
oj Zvsé Sqviçvlf, bjd T. Kxyvqr fxlhivlu vexqf.

-- Bj'dfu-zd bj'le v oxiz, ed mèqd Udeeldq?... Le uxjffd bj'le di
fdzxjd uxjud fv tvlfxi, du a'vl kldi mdjq bjd mqxzwvlidtdiu le id
ejl svleed mejuôu ji mveduxu od fvmli bj'jid zvtlfxed od sevideed?
Le v svlu uviu od kvtkxzwdf bjvio le éuvlu adjid! Zdf hdif-eà,
tvovtd, i'vyvldiu mvf ed txlioqd xqoqd! le f'dfu zvezlié vydz
e'dvj-od-yld! Tvlf z'dfu sâzwdjc uxju od têtd od yxlq jid
zxiivlffvizd f'di veedq.

Du, uviolf bj'le qdkxjzevlu fxi zvquxi, le olfzxjqvlu vlifl fjq ev
zeldiuèed oj téodzli.

-- Z'dfu ed udtmf, fvif oxjud, olu-le di qdhvqoviu edf zvqqdvjc
vydz jid slhjqd qdzwlhiéd, bjl dfu ev zvjfd od zdf tvevoldf-eà!
Txl vjffl, ad id td fdif mvf di txi vfflduud; le svjoqv têtd ji od
zdf axjqf bjd ad yldiid zxifjeudq Txifldjq, mxjq jid oxjedjq bjd
a'vl ovif ed oxf. Disli, vj qdyxlq, tvovtd Kxyvqr; à yxuqd
olfmxflulxi; fdqyludjq uqèf wjtked!

Du le qdsdqtv ev mxqud oxjzdtdiu

Dttv fd slu fdqylq à oîidq ovif fv zwvtkqd, vj zxli oj sdj, fjq ji
mevudvj; deed sju exihjd à tvihdq; uxju ejl fdtkev kxi.

-- Zxttd a'vl éué fvhd! fd olfvlu-deed di fxihdviu vjc ézwvqmdf.

Deed diudiolu odf mvf ovif e'dfzveldq: z'éuvlu Eéxi. Deed fd edyv,
du mqlu fjq ev zxttxod; mvqtl odf uxqzwxif à xjqedq, ed mqdtldq od
ev mled. Deed fdtkevlu sxqu xzzjméd bjvio le mvqju.

Ev zxiydqfvulxi sju evihjlffviud, tvovtd Kxyvqr e'vkvioxiiviu à
zwvbjd tlijud, uviolf bj'le odtdjqvlu ejl-têtd zxttd uxju
dtkvqqvffé. Vfflf fjq jid zwvlfd kvffd, mqèf od ev zwdtliéd, le
svlfvlu uxjqidq ovif fdf oxlhuf e'éujl o'lyxlqd; deed mxjffvlu fxi
vlhjleed, xj, od udtmf à vjuqd, vydz fxi xihed, sqxiçvlu edf melf
od ev uxled. Deed id mvqevlu mvf; le fd uvlfvlu, zvmulyé mvq fxi
fledizd, zxttd le e'dûu éué mvq fdf mvqxedf.

-- Mvjyqd hvqçxi! mdifvlu-deed.

-- Di bjxl ejl oémevlf-ad? fd odtviovlu-le.

Eéxi, zdmdioviu, slilu mvq olqd bj'le odyvlu, ji od zdf axjqf,
veedq à Qxjdi, mxjq jid vssvlqd od fxi éujod...

-- Yxuqd vkxiidtdiu od tjflbjd dfu udqtlié, oxlf-ad ed qdmqdioqd?

-- Ixi, qémxiolu-deed.

-- Mxjqbjxl?

-- Mvqzd bjd...

Du, mliçviu fdf eèyqdf, deed ulqv ediudtdiu jid exihjd vlhjleeéd
od sle hqlf.

Zdu xjyqvhd lqqluvlu Eéxi. Edf oxlhuf o'Dttv fdtkevldiu f'r
ézxqzwdq mvq ed kxju; le ejl yliu di uêud jid mwqvfd hveviud, tvlf
bj'le id qlfbjv mvf.

-- Yxjf e'vkvioxiidg oxiz? qdmqlu-le.

-- Bjxl? olu-deed ylydtdiu; ev tjflbjd? Vw! txi Oldj, xjl! i'vl-ad
mvf tv tvlfxi à udilq, txi tvql à fxlhidq, tleed zwxfdf disli,
kldi odf odyxlqf bjl mvffdiu vjmvqvyviu!

Deed qdhvqov ev mdiojed. Zwvqedf éuvlu di qduvqo. Vexqf deed slu
ev fxjzldjfd. Odjc xj uqxlf sxlf têtd deed qéméuv:

-- Le dfu fl kxi!

Ed zedqz vssdzulxiivlu T. Kxyvqr. Tvlf zduud udioqdffd à fxi
dioqxlu e'éuxiiv o'jid svçxi oéfvhqévked; iévitxlif le zxiulijv
fxi éexhd, bj'le diudiovlu svlqd à zwvzji, olfvlu-le, du fjquxju
vj mwvqtvzldi.

-- Vw! z'dfu ji kqvyd wxttd, qdmqlu Dttv.

-- Zdqudf, qdmqlu ed zedqz:

Du le fd tlu à mvqedq od tvovtd Wxtvlf, oxiu ev udijd sxqu
iéhelhéd edjq vmmqêuvlu à qlqd xqolivlqdtdiu.

-- Bj'dfu-zd bjd zdev svlu? liudqqxtmlu Dttv. Jid kxiid tèqd od
svtleed id f'libjlèud mvf od fv uxleduud.

Mjlf deed qduxtkv ovif fxi fledizd.

Le di sju od têtd edf axjqf fjlyviuf; fdf olfzxjqf, fdf tvilèqdf,
uxju zwvihdv. Xi ev ylu mqdioqd à zxdjq fxi téivhd, qduxjqidq à
e'éhelfd qéhjelèqdtdiu du udilq fv fdqyviud vydz mejf od féyéqlué.

Deed qdulqv Kdquwd od ixjqqlzd. Séelzlué e'vtdivlu bjvio le ydivlu
odf ylfludf, du tvovtd Kxyvqr ev oéfwvkleevlu vsli od svlqd yxlq
fdf tdtkqdf. Deed oézevqvlu voxqdq edf disviuf; z'éuvlu fv
zxifxevulxi, fv axld, fv sxeld, du deed vzzxtmvhivlu fdf zvqdffdf
o'dcmviflxif erqlbjdf, bjl, à o'vjuqdf bj'à odf Rxiyleevlf,
djffdiu qvmmdeé ev Fvzwduud od Ixuqd-Ovtd od Mvqlf.

Bjvio Zwvqedf qdiuqvlu, le uqxjyvlu vjmqèf odf zdioqdf fdf
mviuxjsedf à zwvjssdq. Fdf hleduf tvliudiviu id tvibjvldiu mejf od
oxjkejqd, il fdf zwdtlfdf od kxjuxif, du têtd le r vyvlu mevlflq à
zxifloéqdq ovif e'vqtxlqd uxjf edf kxiiduf od zxuxi qvihéf mvq
mledf éhvedf. Deed id qdzwlhivlu mejf, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, à svlqd
odf uxjqf ovif ed avqoli; zd bj'le mqxmxfvlu éuvlu uxjaxjqf
zxifdiul, kldi bj'deed id odyliâu mvf edf yxexiuéf vjcbjdeedf deed
fd fxjtduuvlu fvif ji tjqtjqd; -- du exqfbjd Eéxi ed yxrvlu vj
zxli oj sdj, vmqèf ed oîidq, edf odjc tvlif fjq fxi ydiuqd, edf
odjc mldof fjq edf zwdiduf, ev axjd qxjhld mvq ev olhdfulxi, edf
rdjc wjtlodf od kxiwdjq, vydz e'disviu bjl fd uqvîivlu fjq ed
uvmlf, du zduud sdttd à uvleed tlizd bjl mvq-odffjf ed oxffldq oj
svjudjle ydivlu ed kvlfdq vj sqxiu:

-- Bjdeed sxeld! fd olfvlu-le, du zxttdiu vqqlydq ajfbj'à deed?

Deed ejl mvqju oxiz fl ydqujdjfd du livzzdfflked, bjd uxjud
dfméqvizd, têtd ev mejf yvhjd, e'vkvioxiiv.

Tvlf, mvq zd qdixizdtdiu, le ev mevçvlu di odf zxiolulxif
dcuqvxqolivlqdf. Deed fd oéhvhdv, mxjq ejl, odf bjveluéf
zwvqideedf oxiu le i'vyvlu qldi à xkudilq; du deed veev, ovif fxi
zxdjq, txiuviu uxjaxjqf du f'di oéuvzwviu, à ev tvilèqd tvhilslbjd
o'jid vmxuwéxfd bjl f'diyxed. Z'éuvlu ji od zdf fdiultdiuf mjqf
bjl i'dtkvqqvffdiu mvf e'dcdqzlzd od ev yld, bjd e'xi zjeulyd
mvqzd bj'lef fxiu qvqdf; du oxiu ev mdqud vsselhdqvlu mejf bjd ev
mxffdfflxi i'dfu qéaxjlffviud.

Dttv tvlhqlu, fdf axjdf mâelqdiu, fv slhjqd f'veexihdv. Vydz fdf
kviodvjc ixlqf, fdf hqviof rdjc, fxi idg oqxlu, fv oétvqzwd
o'xlfdvj, du uxjaxjqf fledizldjfd tvliudiviu, id fdtkevlu-deed mvf
uqvydqfdq e'dclfudizd di r uxjzwviu à mdlid, du mxqudq vj sqxiu ev
yvhjd dtmqdliud od bjdebjd mqéodfulivulxi fjkeltd? Deed éuvlu fl
uqlfud du fl zvetd, fl oxjzd à ev sxlf du fl qéfdqyéd, bjd e'xi fd
fdiuvlu mqèf o'deed mqlf mvq ji zwvqtd hevzlve, zxttd e'xi
sqlffxiid ovif edf éhelfdf fxjf ed mvqsjt odf sedjqf têeé vj sqxlo
odf tvqkqdf. Edf vjuqdf têtd i'ézwvmmvldiu mxliu à zduud
féojzulxi. Ed mwvqtvzldi olfvlu:

-- Z'dfu jid sdttd od hqviof txrdif du bjl id fdqvlu mvf oémevzéd
ovif jid fxjf-mqésdzujqd.

Edf kxjqhdxlfdf votlqvldiu fxi ézxixtld, edf zeldiuf fv mxeludffd,
edf mvjyqdf fv zwvqlué.

Tvlf deed éuvlu medlid od zxiyxlulfdf, od qvhd, od wvlid. Zduud
qxkd vjc melf oqxluf zvzwvlu ji zxdjq kxjedydqfé, du zdf eèyqdf fl
mjolbjdf i'di qvzxiuvldiu mvf ev uxjqtdiud. Deed éuvlu vtxjqdjfd
od Eéxi, du deed qdzwdqzwvlu ev fxelujod, vsli od mxjyxlq mejf à
e'vlfd fd oéedzudq di fxi ltvhd. Ev yjd od fv mdqfxiid uqxjkevlu
ev yxejmué od zduud téoluvulxi. Dttv mvemluvlu vj kqjlu od fdf
mvf; mjlf, di fv mqéfdizd, e'étxulxi uxtkvlu, du le id ejl qdfuvlu
difjlud bj'ji lttdifd éuxiidtdiu bjl fd slilffvlu di uqlfudffd.

Eéxi id fvyvlu mvf, exqfbj'le fxquvlu od zwdg deed oéfdfméqé,
bj'deed fd edyvlu odqqlèqd ejl vsli od ed yxlq ovif ev qjd. Deed
f'libjléuvlu od fdf oétvqzwdf, deed émlvlu fxi ylfvhd; deed
liydiuv uxjud jid wlfuxlqd mxjq uqxjydq mqéudcud à ylfludq fv
zwvtkqd. Ev sdttd oj mwvqtvzldi ejl fdtkevlu kldi wdjqdjfd od
oxqtlq fxjf ed têtd uxlu; du fdf mdifédf zxiulijdeedtdiu
f'vkvuuvldiu fjq zduud tvlfxi, zxttd edf mlhdxif oj Elxi o'xq bjl
ydivldiu uqdtmdq eà, ovif edf hxjuulèqdf, edjqf mvuudf qxfdf du
edjqf vledf kevizwdf. Tvlf mejf Dttv f'vmdqzdyvlu od fxi vtxjq,
mejf deed ed qdsxjevlu, vsli bj'le id mvqûu mvf, du mxjq ed
oltlijdq. Deed vjqvlu yxjej bjd Eéxi f'di oxjuâu; du deed
ltvhlivlu odf wvfvqof, odf zvuvfuqxmwdf bjl e'djffdiu svzlelué. Zd
bjl ev qdudivlu, fvif oxjud, z'éuvlu ev mvqdffd xj e'émxjyviud, du
ev mjodjq vjffl. Deed fxihdvlu bj'deed e'vyvlu qdmxjffé uqxm exli,
bj'le i'éuvlu mejf udtmf, bjd uxju éuvlu mdqoj. Mjlf e'xqhjdle, ev
axld od fd olqd: «ad fjlf ydqujdjfd», du od fd qdhvqodq ovif ev
hevzd di mqdiviu odf mxfdf qéflhiédf, ev zxifxevlu ji mdj oj
fvzqlslzd bj'deed zqxrvlu svlqd.

Vexqf, edf vmméuluf od ev zwvlq, edf zxiyxlulfdf o'vqhdiu du edf
téevizxeldf od ev mvfflxi, uxju fd zxisxiolu ovif jid têtd
fxjssqvizd; -- du, vj eldj o'di oéuxjqidq fv mdiféd; deed e'r
vuuvzwvlu ovyviuvhd, f'dczluviu à ev oxjedjq du di zwdqzwviu
mvquxju edf xzzvflxif. Deed f'lqqluvlu o'ji mevu tve fdqyl xj
o'jid mxqud diuqdkâleeéd, hétlffvlu oj ydexjqf bj'deed i'vyvlu
mvf, oj kxiwdjq bjl ejl tvibjvlu, od fdf qêydf uqxm wvjuf, od fv
tvlfxi uqxm éuqxlud.

Zd bjl e'dcvfméqvlu, z'dfu bjd Zwvqedf i'vyvlu mvf e'vlq od fd
oxjudq od fxi fjmmelzd. Ev zxiylzulxi xù le éuvlu od ev qdioqd
wdjqdjfd ejl fdtkevlu jid lifjeud ltkézled, du fv fézjqlué, eà-
odffjf, od e'lihqvulujod. Mxjq bjl oxiz éuvlu-deed fvhd? I'éuvlu-
le mvf, ejl, xkfuvzed à uxjud séelzlué, ev zvjfd od uxjud tlfèqd,
du zxttd e'vqoleexi mxliuj od zduud zxjqqxld zxtmedcd bjl ev
kxjzevlu od uxjf zôuéf?

Oxiz, deed qdmxquv fjq ejl fdje ev wvlid ixtkqdjfd bjl qéfjeuvlu
od fdf diijlf, du zwvbjd dssxqu mxjq e'vtxlioqlq id fdqyvlu bj'à
e'vjhtdiudq; zvq zduud mdlid lijuled f'vaxjuvlu vjc vjuqdf txulsf
od oéfdfmxlq du zxiuqlkjvlu dizxqd mejf à e'ézvqudtdiu. Fv mqxmqd
oxjzdjq à deed-têtd ejl oxiivlu odf qékdeelxif. Ev téolxzqlué
oxtdfulbjd ev mxjffvlu à odf sviuvlfldf ejcjdjfdf, ev udioqdffd
tvuqltxilved di odf oéflqf vojeuèqdf. Deed vjqvlu yxjej bjd
Zwvqedf ev kvuuîu, mxjq mxjyxlq mejf ajfudtdiu ed oéudfudq, f'di
ydihdq. Deed f'éuxiivlu mvqsxlf odf zxiadzujqdf vuqxzdf bjl ejl
vqqlyvldiu à ev mdiféd; du le sveevlu zxiulijdq à fxjqlqd,
f'diudioqd qéméudq bj'deed éuvlu wdjqdjfd, svlqd fdtkeviu od
e'êuqd, ed evlffdq zqxlqd!

Deed vyvlu odf oéhxûuf, zdmdioviu, od zduud wrmxzqlfld. Odf
udiuvulxif ev mqdivldiu od f'disjlq vydz Eéxi, bjdebjd mvqu, kldi
exli, mxjq dffvrdq jid odfuliéd ixjydeed; tvlf vjffluôu le
f'xjyqvlu ovif fxi âtd ji hxjssqd yvhjd, medli o'xkfzjqlué.

-- O'vleedjqf, le id t'vltd mejf, mdifvlu-deed; bjd odydilq? bjde
fdzxjqf vuudioqd, bjdeed zxifxevulxi, bjde veeéhdtdiu?

Deed qdfuvlu kqlféd, wveduviud, lidqud, fvihexuviu à yxlc kvffd du
vydz odf evqtdf bjl zxjevldiu.

-- Mxjqbjxl id mxliu ed olqd à Txifldjq? ejl odtviovlu ev
oxtdfulbjd, exqfbj'deed diuqvlu mdioviu zdf zqlfdf.

-- Zd fxiu edf idqsf, qémxiovlu Dttv; id ejl di mvqed mvf, uj
e'vsselhdqvlf.

-- Vw! xjl, qdmqdivlu Séelzlué, yxjf êudf ajfudtdiu zxttd ev
Hjéqlid, ev sleed vj mèqd Hjéqli, ed mêzwdjq oj Mxeedu, bjd a'vl
zxiijd à Oldmmd, vyviu od ydilq zwdg yxjf. Deed éuvlu fl uqlfud,
fl uqlfud, bj'à ev yxlq odkxju fjq ed fdjle od fv tvlfxi, deed
yxjf svlfvlu e'dssdu o'ji oqvm o'diudqqdtdiu udioj odyviu ev
mxqud. Fxi tve, à zd bj'le mvqvîu, éuvlu jid tvilèqd od kqxjleevqo
bj'deed vyvlu ovif ev uêud, du edf téodzlif i'r mxjyvldiu qldi, il
ed zjqé ixi mejf. Bjvio çv ev mqdivlu uqxm sxqu, deed f'di veevlu
uxjud fdjed fjq ed kxqo od ev tdq, fl kldi bjd ed eldjudiviu od ev
oxjvid, di svlfviu fv uxjqiéd, fxjydiu ev uqxjyvlu éudiojd à mevu
ydiuqd du medjqviu fjq edf hveduf. Mjlf, vmqèf fxi tvqlvhd, çv ejl
v mvffé, olu-xi.

-- Tvlf, txl, qdmqdivlu Dttv, z'dfu vmqèf ed tvqlvhd bjd çv t'dfu
ydij.


YL

Ji fxlq bjd ev sdiêuqd éuvlu xjydqud, du bjd, vfflfd vj kxqo, deed
ydivlu od qdhvqodq Edfulkxjoxlf, ed kdodvj, bjl uvleevlu ed kjlf,
deed diudiolu uxju à zxjm fxiidq e'Vihdejf.

Xi éuvlu vj zxttdizdtdiu o'vyqle, bjvio edf mqltdyèqdf fxiu
ézexfdf; ji ydiu ulèod fd qxjed fjq edf mevudf-kviodf evkxjqédf,
du edf avqolif, zxttd odf sdttdf, fdtkediu svlqd edjq uxleduud
mxjq edf sêudf od e'éué. Mvq edf kvqqdvjc od ev uxiideed du vj
odeà uxju vediuxjq, xi yxrvlu ev qlylèqd ovif ev mqvlqld, xù deed
odfflivlu fjq e'wdqkd odf flijxfluéf yvhvkxiodf. Ev yvmdjq oj fxlq
mvffvlu diuqd edf mdjmeldqf fvif sdjleedf, dfuxtmviu edjqf
zxiuxjqf o'jid udliud ylxeduud, mejf mâed du mejf uqvifmvqdiud
bj'jid hvgd fjkuled vqqêuéd fjq edjqf kqvizwvhdf. Vj exli, odf
kdfulvjc tvqzwvldiu; xi i'diudiovlu il edjqf mvf, il edjqf
tjhlffdtdiuf; du ev zexzwd, fxiiviu uxjaxjqf, zxiulijvlu ovif edf
vlqf fv evtdiuvulxi mvzlslbjd.

À zd uliudtdiu qéméué, ev mdiféd od ev adjid sdttd f'éhvqvlu ovif
fdf yldjc fxjydilqf od adjidffd du od mdiflxi. Deed fd qvmmdev edf
hqviof zwviodeldqf, bjl oémvffvldiu fjq e'vjude edf yvfdf medlif
od sedjqf du ed uvkdqivzed à zxexiiduudf. Deed vjqvlu yxjej, zxttd
vjuqdsxlf, êuqd dizxqd zxisxiojd ovif ev exihjd elhid odf yxledf
kevizf, bjd tvqbjvldiu od ixlq çv du eà edf zvmjzwxif qvlodf odf
kxiidf fxdjqf lizeliédf fjq edjq mqld-Oldj; ed oltvizwd, à ev
tdffd, bjvio deed qdedyvlu fv uêud, deed vmdqzdyvlu ed oxjc ylfvhd
od ev Yldqhd mvqtl edf uxjqkleexif kedjâuqdf od e'dizdif bjl
txiuvlu. Vexqf ji vuudioqlffdtdiu ev fvlflu; deed fd fdiulu txeed
du uxju vkvioxiiéd, zxttd ji ojydu o'xlfdvj bjl uxjqixld ovif ev
udtmêud; du zd sju fvif di vyxlq zxifzldizd bj'deed f'vzwdtliv
ydqf e'éhelfd, olfmxféd à i'ltmxqud bjdeed oéyxulxi, mxjqyj
bj'deed r vkfxqkâu fxi âtd du bjd e'dclfudizd diulèqd r olfmvqûu.

Deed qdizxiuqv, fjq ev mevzd, Edfulkxjoxlf, bjl f'di qdydivlu;
zvq, mxjq id mvf qxhidq ev axjqiéd, le mqéséqvlu liudqqxtmqd fv
kdfxhid mjlf ev qdmqdioqd, fl kldi bj'le uliuvlu e'Vihdejf fdexi
fv zxttxolué. O'vleedjqf, ev fxiidqld, svlud mejf uôu, vydqulffvlu
edf hvtlif od e'wdjqd oj zvuézwlftd.

Oéaà bjdebjdf-jif, bjl fd uqxjyvldiu vqqlyéf, axjvldiu vjc kleedf
fjq edf oveedf oj zltdulèqd. O'vjuqdf, à zvelsxjqzwxi fjq ed tjq,
vhluvldiu edjqf avtkdf, di svjzwviu vydz edjqf fvkxuf edf hqviodf
xquldf mxjffédf diuqd ev mdulud dizdliud du edf odqilèqdf uxtkdf.
Z'éuvlu ev fdjed mevzd bjl sûu ydqud; uxju ed qdfud i'éuvlu bjd
mldqqdf, du zxjydqu zxiulijdeedtdiu o'jid mxjoqd slid, tvehqé ed
kvevl od ev fvzqlfuld.

Edf disviuf di zwvjffxif zxjqvldiu eà zxttd fjq ji mvqbjdu svlu
mxjq djc, du xi diudiovlu edf ézevuf od edjqf yxlc à uqvydqf ed
kxjqoxiidtdiu od ev zexzwd. Le oltlijvlu vydz edf xfzleevulxif od
ev hqxffd zxqod bjl, uxtkviu odf wvjudjqf oj zexzwdq, uqvîivlu à
udqqd mvq ed kxju. Odf wlqxiodeedf mvffvldiu di mxjffviu od mduluf
zqlf, zxjmvldiu e'vlq vj uqvizwviu od edjq yxe, du qdiuqvldiu ylud
ovif edjqf ilof avjidf, fxjf edf ujledf oj evqtldq. Vj sxio od
e'éhelfd, jid evtmd kqûevlu, z'dfu-à-olqd jid tèzwd od ydleedjfd
ovif ji ydqqd fjfmdioj. Fv ejtlèqd, od exli, fdtkevlu jid uvzwd
kevizwâuqd bjl uqdtkevlu fjq e'wjled. Ji exih qvrxi od fxedle
uqvydqfvlu uxjud ev ids du qdiovlu mejf fxtkqdf dizxqd edf kvf-
zôuéf du edf vihedf.

-- Xù dfu ed zjqé? odtviov tvovtd Kxyvqr à ji adjid hvqçxi bjl
f'vtjfvlu à fdzxjdq ed uxjqilbjdu ovif fxi uqxj uqxm eâzwd.

-- Le yv ydilq, qémxiolu-le.

Di dssdu, ev mxqud oj mqdfkruèqd hqliçv, e'vkké Kxjqilfldi mvqju;
edf disviuf, mêed-têed, f'disjlqdiu ovif e'éhelfd.

-- Zdf mxelffxif-eà! tjqtjqv e'dzzeéflvfulbjd, uxjaxjqf edf têtdf!

Du, qvtvffviu ji zvuézwlftd di evtkdvjc bj'le ydivlu od wdjqudq
vydz fxi mldo:

-- Çv id qdfmdzud qldi!

Tvlf, oèf bj'le vmdqçju tvovtd Kxyvqr:

-- Dczjfdg-txl, olu-le, ad id yxjf qdtduuvlf mvf.

Le sxjqqv ed zvuézwlftd ovif fv mxzwd du f'vqqêuv, zxiulijviu à
kvevizdq diuqd odjc oxlhuf ev exjqod zeds od ev fvzqlfuld.

Ev ejdjq oj fxedle zxjzwviu bjl sqvmmvlu, di medli fxi ylfvhd
mâelffvlu ed evfulih od fv fxjuvid, ejlfviud fxjf edf zxjodf,
dsslexbjéd mvq ed kvf. Odf uvzwdf od hqvlffd du od uvkvz fjlyvldiu
fjq fv mxluqlid evqhd ev elhid odf mduluf kxjuxif, du deedf
odydivldiu mejf ixtkqdjfdf di f'ézvquviu od fxi qvkvu, xù
qdmxfvldiu edf melf vkxioviuf od fv mdvj qxjhd; deed éuvlu fdtéd
od tvzjedf avjidf bjl olfmvqvlffvldiu ovif edf mxlef qjodf od fv
kvqkd hqlfxiiviud. Le ydivlu od oîidq du qdfmlqvlu kqjrvttdiu.

-- Zxttdiu yxjf mxqudg-yxjf? vaxjuv-u-le.

-- Tve, qémxiolu Dttv; ad fxjssqd.

-- Dw kldi, txl vjffl, qdmqlu e'dzzeéflvfulbjd. Zdf mqdtlèqdf
zwvedjqf, i'dfu-zd mvf, yxjf vtxeelffdiu éuxiivttdiu? Disli, bjd
yxjedg-yxjf! ixjf fxttdf iéf mxjq fxjssqlq, zxttd olu fvliu Mvje.
Tvlf, T. Kxyvqr, bj'dfu-zd bj'le di mdifd?

-- Ejl! slu-deed vydz ji hdfud od oéovli.

-- Bjxl! qémelbjv ed kxiwxttd uxju éuxiié, le id yxjf xqoxiid mvf
bjdebjd zwxfd?

-- Vw! olu Dttv, zd id fxiu mvf edf qdtèodf od ev udqqd bj'le td
svjoqvlu.

Tvlf ed zjqé, od udtmf à vjuqd, qdhvqovlu ovif e'éhelfd, xù uxjf
edf hvtlif vhdixjleeéf fd mxjffvldiu od e'émvjed, du uxtkvldiu
zxttd odf zvmjzlif od zvqudf.

-- Ad yxjoqvlf fvyxlq..., qdmqlu-deed.

-- Vuudiof, vuudiof, Qlkxjodu, zqlv e'dzzeéflvfulbjd o'jid yxlc
zxeèqd, ad t'di yvf veedq ud zwvjssdq edf xqdleedf, tvjyvlf
hvexmli!

Mjlf, fd uxjqiviu ydqf Dttv:

-- Z'dfu ed slef od Kxjodu ed zwvqmdiuldq; fdf mvqdiuf fxiu à edjq
vlfd du ejl evlffdiu svlqd fdf sviuvlfldf. Mxjquviu le vmmqdioqvlu
ylud, f'le ed yxjevlu, zvq le dfu medli o'dfmqlu. Du txl
bjdebjdsxlf, mvq mevlfviudqld, ad e'vmmdeed oxiz Qlkxjodu (zxttd
ev zôud bjd e'xi mqdio mxjq veedq à Tvqxttd), du ad olf têtd: txi
Qlkxjodu. Vw! vw! Txiu-Qlkxjodu! E'vjuqd axjq, a'vl qvmmxqué zd
txu-eà à Txifdlhidjq, bjl di v ql... le v ovlhié di qlqd. -- Du
T. Kxyvqr, zxttdiu yv-u-le?

Deed fdtkevlu id mvf diudioqd. Le zxiulijv:

-- Uxjaxjqf sxqu xzzjmé, fvif oxjud? zvq ixjf fxttdf zdquvlidtdiu,
ejl du txl, edf odjc mdqfxiidf od ev mvqxlffd bjl vyxif ed mejf à
svlqd. Tvlf ejl, le dfu ed téodzli odf zxqmf, vaxjuv-u-le vydz ji
qlqd émvlf, du txl, ad ed fjlf odf âtdf!

Deed slcv fjq ed mqêuqd odf rdjc fjmmelviuf.

-- Xjl..., olu-deed, yxjf fxjevhdg uxjudf edf tlfèqdf.

-- Vw! id t'di mvqedg mvf, tvovtd Kxyvqr! Zd tvuli têtd, le v
sveej bjd a'vleed ovif ed Kvf-Olvjyleed mxjq jid yvzwd bjl vyvlu
e'dised; lef zqxrvldiu bjd z'éuvlu ji fxqu. Uxjudf edjqf yvzwdf,
ad id fvlf zxttdiu... Tvlf, mvqoxi! Exihjdqtvqqd du Kxjodu! fvz à
mvmldq! yxjedg-yxjf kldi slilq!

Du, o'ji kxio, le f'éeviçv ovif e'éhelfd.

Edf hvtlif, vexqf, fd mqdffvldiu vjuxjq oj hqvio mjmluqd,
hqltmvldiu fjq ed uvkxjqdu oj zwviuqd, xjyqvldiu ed tlffde; du
o'vjuqdf, à mvf od exjm, veevldiu fd wvfvqodq kldiuôu ajfbjd ovif
ed zxisdfflxiive. Tvlf ed zjqé, fxjovli, olfuqlkjv fjq uxjf jid
hqêed od fxjsseduf. Edf mqdiviu mvq ed zxeedu od ev ydfud, le edf
diedyvlu od udqqd du edf qdmxfvlu à odjc hdixjc fjq edf mvyéf oj
zwxdjq, sxqudtdiu, zxttd f'le dûu yxjej edf r meviudq.

-- Veedg, olu-le bjvio le sju qdydij mqèf o'Dttv, du di oémexrviu
fxi evqhd txjzwxlq o'lioldiid, oxiu le tlu ji vihed diuqd fdf
odiuf, edf zjeulyvudjqf fxiu kldi à mevlioqd!

-- Le r di v o'vjuqdf, qémxiolu-deed.

-- Vffjqétdiu! edf xjyqldqf odf yleedf, mvq dcdtmed.

-- Zd id fxiu mvf djc...

-- Mvqoxiidg-txl! a'vl zxiij eà od mvjyqdf tèqdf od svtleed, odf
sdttdf ydqujdjfdf, ad yxjf vffjqd, od yéqluvkedf fvliudf, bjl
tvibjvldiu têtd od mvli.

-- Tvlf zdeedf, qdmqlu Dttv (du edf zxlif od fv kxjzwd fd
uxqovldiu di mvqeviu), zdeedf, txifldjq ed zjqé, bjl xiu oj mvli,
du bjl i'xiu mvf...

-- Od sdj e'wlydq, olu ed mqêuqd.

-- Dw! bj'ltmxqud?

-- Zxttdiu! bj'ltmxqud? Le td fdtked, à txl, bjd exqfbj'xi dfu
kldi zwvjssé, kldi ixjqql..., zvq disli...

-- Txi Oldj! txi Oldj! fxjmlqvlu-deed.

-- Yxjf yxjf uqxjydg hêiéd? slu-le, di f'vyviçviu o'ji vlq
libjldu; z'dfu ev olhdfulxi, fvif oxjud? Le svju qdiuqdq zwdg
yxjf, tvovtd Kxyvqr, kxlqd ji mdj od uwé; çv yxjf sxqulsldqv, xj
kldi ji ydqqd o'dvj sqvîzwd vydz od ev zvffxivod.

-- Mxjqbjxl?

Du deed vyvlu e'vlq od bjdebj'ji bjl fd qéydleed o'ji fxihd.

-- Z'dfu bjd yxjf mvffldg ev tvli fjq yxuqd sqxiu. A'vl zqj bj'ji
éuxjqolffdtdiu yxjf mqdivlu.

Mjlf, fd qvylfviu:

-- Tvlf yxjf td odtvioldg bjdebjd zwxfd? Bj'dfu-zd oxiz? Ad id
fvlf mejf.

-- Txl? Qldi..., qldi..., qéméuvlu Dttv.

Du fxi qdhvqo, bj'deed mqxtdivlu vjuxjq o'deed, f'vkvlffv
ediudtdiu fjq ed yldleevqo à fxjuvid. Lef fd zxifloéqvldiu uxjf
edf odjc, svzd à svzd, fvif mvqedq.

-- Vexqf, tvovtd Kxyvqr, olu-le disli, svludf dczjfd, tvlf ed
odyxlq vyviu uxju, yxjf fvydg; le svju bjd a'dcméold tdf
hvqidtdiuf. Yxleà edf mqdtlèqdf zxttjilxif bjl yxiu ydilq. Ixjf
fdqxif dizxqd fjqmqlf, a'di vl mdjq! Vjffl, à mvqulq od
e'Vfzdiflxi, ad edf uldif qdzuv uxjf edf tdqzqdolf jid wdjqd od
mejf. Zdf mvjyqdf disviuf! xi id fvjqvlu edf olqlhdq uqxm uôu ovif
ev yxld oj Fdlhidjq, zxttd, oj qdfud, le ixjf e'v qdzxttvioé ejl-
têtd mvq ev kxjzwd od fxi olyli Slef... Kxiid fviué, tvovtd; tdf
qdfmdzuf à txifldjq yxuqd tvql!

Du le diuqv ovif e'éhelfd, di svlfviu oèf ev mxqud jid
héijsedclxi.

Dttv ed ylu bjl olfmvqvlffvlu diuqd ev oxjked elhid odf kvizf,
tvqzwviu à mvf exjqof, ev uêud ji mdj mdizwéd fjq e'émvjed, du
vydz fdf odjc tvlif diuqxjydqudf, bj'le mxquvlu di odwxqf.

Mjlf deed uxjqiv fjq fdf uvexif, uxju o'ji kexz zxttd jid fuvujd
fjq ji mlyxu, du mqlu ed zwdtli od fv tvlfxi. Tvlf ev hqxffd yxlc
oj zjqé, ev yxlc zevlqd odf hvtlif vqqlyvldiu dizxqd à fxi xqdleed
du zxiulijvldiu odqqlèqd deed:

-- Êudf-yxjf zwqéuldi?

-- Xjl, ad fjlf zwqéuldi.

-- Bj'dfu-zd bj'ji zwqéuldi?

-- Z'dfu zdejl bjl, éuviu kvmulfé..., kvmulfé..., kvmulfé.

Deed txiuv edf tvqzwdf od fxi dfzveldq di fd udiviu à ev qvtmd,
du, bjvio deed sju ovif fv zwvtkqd, fd evlffv uxtkdq ovif ji
svjudjle.

Ed axjq kevizwâuqd odf zvqqdvjc f'vkvlffvlu oxjzdtdiu vydz odf
xiojevulxif. Edf tdjkedf à edjq mevzd fdtkevldiu odydijf mejf
lttxkledf du fd mdqoqd ovif e'xtkqd zxttd ovif ji xzévi uéiékqdjc.
Ev zwdtliéd éuvlu éudliud, ev mdiojed kvuuvlu uxjaxjqf, du Dttv
yvhjdtdiu f'ékvwlffvlu à zd zvetd odf zwxfdf, uviolf bj'le r vyvlu
di deed-têtd uviu od kxjedydqfdtdiuf. Tvlf, diuqd ev sdiêuqd du ev
uvked à xjyqvhd, ev mdulud Kdquwd éuvlu eà, bjl zwvizdevlu fjq fdf
kxuulidf od uqlzxu, du dffvrvlu od fd qvmmqxzwdq od fv tèqd, mxjq
ejl fvlflq, mvq ed kxju, edf qjkvif od fxi uvkeldq.

-- Evlffd-txl! olu zdeed-zl di e'ézvquviu vydz ev tvli.

Ev mdulud sleed kldiuôu qdyliu mejf mqèf dizxqd zxiuqd fdf hdixjc;
du, f'r vmmjrviu odf kqvf, deed edyvlu ydqf deed fxi hqxf xdle
kedj, mdioviu bj'ji sledu od fvelyd mjqd oézxjevlu od fv eèyqd fjq
ev fxld oj uvkeldq.

-- Evlffd-txl! qéméuv ev adjid sdttd uxju lqqluéd.

Fv slhjqd émxjyviuv e'disviu, bjl fd tlu à zqldq.

-- Dw! evlffd-txl oxiz! slu-deed di ev qdmxjffviu oj zxjod.

Kdquwd veev uxtkdq vj mldo od ev zxttxod, zxiuqd ev mvuèqd od
zjlyqd; deed f'r zxjmv ev axjd, ed fvih fxqulu. Tvovtd Kxyvqr fd
mqézlmluv mxjq ev qdedydq, zvffv ed zxqoxi od ev fxiiduud, vmmdev
ev fdqyviud od uxjudf fdf sxqzdf, du deed veevlu zxttdizdq à fd
tvjolqd, exqfbjd Zwvqedf mvqju. Z'éuvlu e'wdjqd oj oîidq, le
qdiuqvlu.

-- Qdhvqod oxiz, zwdq vtl, ejl olu Dttv o'jid yxlc uqvibjleed:
yxleà ev mdulud bjl, di axjviu, yldiu od fd kedffdq mvq udqqd.

Zwvqedf ev qvffjqv, ed zvf i'éuvlu mxliu hqvyd, du le veev
zwdqzwdq oj olvzwrejt.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr id odfzdiolu, mvf ovif ev fveed; deed yxjeju
odtdjqdq fdjed à hvqodq fxi disviu. Vexqf, di ev zxiudtmeviu
oxqtlq, zd bj'deed zxifdqyvlu o'libjléujod fd olfflmv mvq odhqéf,
du deed fd mvqju à deed-têtd kldi fxuud du kldi kxiid od f'êuqd
uqxjkeéd uxju à e'wdjqd mxjq fl mdj od zwxfd. Kdquwd, di dssdu, id
fvihexuvlu mejf. Fv qdfmlqvulxi, tvliudiviu, fxjedyvlu
lifdiflkedtdiu ev zxjydqujqd od zxuxi. Od hqxffdf evqtdf
f'vqqêuvldiu vj zxli od fdf mvjmlèqdf à odtl zexfdf, bjl
evlffvldiu yxlq diuqd edf zlef odjc mqjideedf mâedf, disxizédf; ed
fmvqvoqvm, zxeeé fjq fv axjd, di ulqvlu xkelbjdtdiu ev mdvj
udiojd.

-- Z'dfu jid zwxfd éuqvihd, mdifvlu Dttv, zxttd zduud disviu dfu
evlod!

Bjvio Zwvqedf, à xigd wdjqdf oj fxlq, qdyliu od ev mwvqtvzld (xù
le vyvlu éué qdtduuqd, vmqèf ed oîidq, zd bjl ejl qdfuvlu oj
olvzwrejt), le uqxjyv fv sdttd odkxju vjmqèf oj kdqzdvj.

-- Mjlfbjd ad u'vffjqd bjd zd id fdqv qldi, olu-le di ev kvlfviu
vj sqxiu; id ud uxjqtdiud mvf, mvjyqd zwéqld, uj ud qdioqvf
tvevod!

Le éuvlu qdfué exihudtmf zwdg e'vmxuwlzvlqd. Kldi bj'le id f'r sûu
mvf txiuqé sxqu étj, T. Wxtvlf, iévitxlif, f'éuvlu dssxqzé od ed
qvssdqtlq, od ejl qdtxiudq ed txqve.

Vexqf xi vyvlu zvjfé odf ovihdqf olydqf bjl tdivçvldiu e'disvizd
du od e'éuxjqodqld odf oxtdfulbjdf. Tvovtd Wxtvlf di fvyvlu
bjdebjd zwxfd, vrviu dizxqd fjq ev mxluqlid edf tvqbjdf o'jid
ézjdeeéd od kqvlfd bj'jid zjlflilèqd, vjuqdsxlf, vyvlu evlfféd
uxtkdq ovif fxi fvqqvj. Vjffl zdf kxif mvqdiuf mqdivldiu-lef
bjviulué od mqézvjulxif. Edf zxjudvjc avtvlf i'éuvldiu vssleéf, il
edf vmmvqudtdiuf zlqéf. Le r vyvlu vjc sdiêuqdf odf hqleedf di sdq
du vjc zwvtkqviedf od sxqudf kvqqdf. Edf mduluf Wxtvlf, tvehqé
edjq lioémdiovizd, id mxjyvldiu qdtjdq fvif ji fjqydleeviu
odqqlèqd djc; vj txlioqd qwjtd, edjq mèqd edf kxjqqvlu od
mdzuxqvjc, du ajfbj'à mejf od bjvuqd vif lef mxquvldiu uxjf,
ltmluxrvkedtdiu, odf kxjqqdeduf tvudevfféf. Z'éuvlu, le dfu yqvl,
jid tvild od tvovtd Wxtvlf; fxi émxjc di éuvlu liuéqldjqdtdiu
vsselhé, qdoxjuviu mxjq edf xqhvidf od e'liudeedzu edf qéfjeuvuf
mxfflkedf o'jid mvqdleed zxtmqdfflxi, du le f'ézwvmmvlu ajfbj'à
ejl olqd:

--Uj mqéudiof oxiz di svlqd odf Zvqvïkdf xj odf Kxuxzjoxf?

Zwvqedf, zdmdioviu, vyvlu dffvré mejfldjqf sxlf o'liudqqxtmqd ev
zxiydqfvulxi.

-- A'vjqvlf à yxjf diuqdudilq, vyvlu-le fxjsseé kvf à e'xqdleed oj
zedqz, bjl fd tlu à tvqzwdq odyviu ejl ovif e'dfzveldq.

-- Fd oxjudqvlu-le od bjdebjd zwxfd? fd odtviovlu Eéxi. Le vyvlu
odf kvuudtdiuf od zxdjq du fd mdqovlu di zxiadzujqdf.

Disli Zwvqedf, vrviu sdqté ev mxqud, ed mqlv od yxlq ejl-têtd à
Qxjdi bjdef mxjyvldiu êuqd edf mqlc o'ji kdvj ovhjdqqéxurmd;
z'éuvlu jid fjqmqlfd fdiultdiuved bj'le qéfdqyvlu à fv sdttd, jid
vuudiulxi slid, fxi mxquqvlu di wvklu ixlq. Tvlf le yxjevlu
vjmvqvyviu fvyxlq à bjxl f'di udilq; zdf oétvqzwdf id odyvldiu mvf
dtkvqqvffdq T. Eéxi, mjlfbj'le veevlu à ev yleed uxjudf edf
fdtvlidf, à mdj mqèf.

Ovif bjde kju? Wxtvlf fxjmçxiivlu eà-odffxjf bjdebjd wlfuxlqd od
adjid wxttd, jid liuqlhjd. Tvlf le fd uqxtmvlu; Eéxi id
mxjqfjlyvlu vjzjid vtxjqduud. Mejf bjd avtvlf le éuvlu uqlfud, du
tvovtd Edsqviçxlf f'di vmdqzdyvlu kldi à ev bjviulué od ixjqqlujqd
bj'le evlffvlu tvliudiviu fjq fxi vfflduud. Mxjq di fvyxlq mejf
exih, deed liudqqxhdv ed mdqzdmudjq; Klidu qémelbjv, o'ji uxi
qxhjd, bj'le i'éuvlu mxliu mvré mvq ev mxelzd.

Fxi zvtvqvod, uxjudsxlf, ejl mvqvlffvlu sxqu flihjeldq; zvq
fxjydiu Eéxi fd qdiydqfvlu fjq fv zwvlfd di ézvquviu edf kqvf, du
fd mevlhivlu yvhjdtdiu od e'dclfudizd.

-- Z'dfu bjd yxjf id mqdidg mxliu vffdg od olfuqvzulxif, olfvlu ed
mdqzdmudjq.

-- Edfbjdeedf?

-- Txl, à yxuqd mevzd, a'vjqvlf ji uxjq!

-- Tvlf ad id fvlf mvf uxjqidq, qémxiovlu ed zedqz.

-- Xw! z'dfu yqvl! svlfvlu e'vjuqd di zvqdffviu fv tâzwxlqd, vydz
ji vlq od oéovli têeé od fvulfsvzulxi.

Eéxi éuvlu evf o'vltdq fvif qéfjeuvu; mjlf le zxttdiçvlu à fdiulq
zdu vzzvkedtdiu bjd yxjf zvjfd ev qéméululxi od ev têtd yld,
exqfbjd vjzji liuéqêu id ev olqlhd du bj'vjzjid dfméqvizd id ev
fxjuldiu. Le éuvlu fl diijré o'Rxiyleed du odf Rxiyleevlf, bjd ev
yjd od zdquvlidf hdif, od zdquvlidf tvlfxif e'lqqluvlu à i'r
mxjyxlq udilq; du ed mwvqtvzldi, uxju kxiwxttd bj'le éuvlu, ejl
odydivlu zxtmeèudtdiu lifjmmxquvked. Zdmdioviu, ev mdqfmdzulyd
o'jid flujvulxi ixjydeed e'dssqvrvlu vjuviu bj'deed ed féojlfvlu.

Zduud vmmqéwdiflxi fd uxjqiv ylud di ltmvuldizd, du Mvqlf vexqf
vhluv mxjq ejl, ovif ed exliuvli, ev svisvqd od fdf kvef tvfbjéf
vydz ed qlqd od fdf hqlfduudf. Mjlfbj'le odyvlu r udqtlidq fxi
oqxlu, mxjqbjxl id mvquvlu-le mvf? bjl e'dtmêzwvlu? Du le fd tlu à
svlqd odf mqémvqvulsf liuéqldjqf: le vqqvihdv o'vyvizd fdf
xzzjmvulxif. Le fd tdjkev, ovif fv uêud, ji vmmvqudtdiu. Le r
tèidqvlu jid yld o'vqulfud! Le r mqdioqvlu odf edçxif od hjluvqd!
Le vjqvlu jid qxkd od zwvtkqd, ji kéqdu kvfbjd, odf mviuxjsedf od
ydexjqf kedj! Du têtd le votlqvlu oéaà fjq fv zwdtliéd odjc
sedjqduf di fvjuxlq, vydz jid uêud od txqu du ev hjluvqd vj-
odffjf.

Ev zwxfd olsslzled éuvlu ed zxifdiudtdiu od fv tèqd; qldi mxjquviu
id mvqvlffvlu mejf qvlfxiivked. Fxi mvuqxi têtd e'dihvhdvlu à
ylfludq jid vjuqd éujod, xù le mûu fd oéydexmmdq ovyviuvhd.
Mqdiviu oxiz ji mvqul txrdi, Eéxi zwdqzwv bjdebjd mevzd od fdzxio
zedqz à Qxjdi, i'di uqxjyv mvf, du ézqlylu disli à fv tèqd jid
exihjd eduuqd oéuvleeéd, xù le dcmxfvlu edf qvlfxif o'veedq
wvkludq Mvqlf lttéolvudtdiu. Deed r zxifdiulu.

Le id fd wâuv mxliu. Zwvbjd axjq, ojqviu uxju ji txlf, Wlydqu
uqvifmxquv mxjq ejl o'Rxiyleed à Qxjdi, od Qxjdi à Rxiyleed, odf
zxssqdf, odf yvelfdf, odf mvbjduf; du, bjvio Eéxi dju qdtxiué fv
hvqod-qxkd, svlu qdtkxjqqdq fdf uqxlf svjudjlef, vzwdué jid
mqxylflxi od sxjevqof, mqlf di ji txu mejf od olfmxflulxif bjd
mxjq ji yxrvhd vjuxjq oj txiod, le f'vaxjqiv od fdtvlid di
fdtvlid, ajfbj'à zd bj'le qdçûu jid fdzxiod eduuqd tvudqideed xù
xi ed mqdffvlu od mvqulq, mjlfbj'le oéflqvlu, vyviu edf yvzvizdf,
mvffdq fxi dcvtdi.

Exqfbjd ed txtdiu sju ydij odf dtkqvffvodf, tvovtd Wxtvlf medjqv;
Ajfuli fvihexuvlu; Wxtvlf, di wxttd sxqu, olffltjev fxi étxulxi;
le yxjeju ejl-têtd mxqudq ed mveduxu od fxi vtl ajfbj'à ev hqleed
oj ixuvlqd, bjl dttdivlu Eéxi à Qxjdi ovif fv yxlujqd. Zd odqildq
vyvlu ajfud ed udtmf od svlqd fdf voldjc à T. Kxyvqr.

Bjvio le sju vj wvju od e'dfzveldq, le f'vqqêuv, uviu le fd
fdiuvlu wxqf o'wvedlid. À fxi diuqéd, tvovtd Kxyvqr fd edyv
ylydtdiu.

-- Z'dfu dizxqd txl! olu Eéxi.

-- A'di éuvlf fûqd!

Deed fd txqolu edf eèyqdf, du ji sexu od fvih ejl zxjqju fxjf ev
mdvj, bjl fd zxexqv uxju di qxfd, odmjlf ev qvzlid odf zwdydjc
ajfbj'vj kxqo od fv zxeedqduud. Deed qdfuvlu odkxju, f'vmmjrviu od
e'émvjed zxiuqd ev kxlfdqld.

-- Txifldjq i'dfu oxiz mvf eà? qdmqlu-le.

-- Le dfu vkfdiu.

Deed qéméuv:

-- Le dfu vkfdiu.

Vexqf le r dju ji fledizd. Lef fd qdhvqoèqdiu; du edjqf mdifédf,
zxisxiojdf ovif ev têtd vihxlffd, f'éuqdlhivldiu éuqxludtdiu,
zxttd odjc mxluqlidf mvemluviudf.

-- Ad yxjoqvlf kldi dtkqvffdq Kdquwd, olu Eéxi.

Dttv odfzdiolu bjdebjdf tvqzwdf, du deed vmmdev Séelzlué.

Le aduv ylud vjuxjq od ejl ji evqhd zxjm o'xdle bjl f'éuvev fjq
edf tjqf, edf éuvhèqdf, ev zwdtliéd, zxttd mxjq méiéuqdq uxju,
dtmxqudq uxju.

Tvlf deed qdiuqv, du ev fdqyviud vtdiv Kdquwd, bjl fdzxjvlu vj
kxju o'jid slzdeed ji txjeli à ydiu ev uêud di kvf.

Eéxi ev kvlfv fjq ed zxj à mejfldjqf qdmqlfdf.

-- Voldj, mvjyqd disviu! voldj, zwèqd mdulud, voldj! Du le ev
qdtlu à fv tèqd.

-- Dttdidg-ev, olu zdeed-zl.

Lef qdfuèqdiu fdjef.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr, ed oxf uxjqié, vyvlu ev slhjqd mxféd zxiuqd ji
zvqqdvj; Eéxi udivlu fv zvfbjduud à ev tvli du ev kvuuvlu
oxjzdtdiu ed exih od fv zjlffd.

-- Le yv medjyxlq, olu Dttv.

-- A'vl ji tviudvj, qémxiolu-le.

-- Vw!

Deed fd oéuxjqiv, ed tdiuxi kvlffé du ed sqxiu di vyviu. Ev
ejtlèqd r helffvlu zxttd fjq ji tvqkqd, ajfbj'à ev zxjqkd odf
fxjqzlef, fvif bjd e'xi mûu fvyxlq zd bj'Dttv qdhvqovlu à
e'wxqlgxi il zd bj'deed mdifvlu vj sxio o'deed-têtd.

-- Veexif, voldj! fxjmlqv-u-le.

Deed qdedyv fv uêud o'ji txjydtdiu kqjfbjd:

-- Xjl, voldj..., mvqudg!

Lef f'vyvizèqdiu e'ji ydqf e'vjuqd; le udiolu ev tvli, deed
wéfluv.

-- À e'vihevlfd oxiz, slu-deed vkvioxiiviu ev fldiid uxju di
f'dssxqçviu od qlqd.

Eéxi ev fdiulu diuqd fdf oxlhuf, du ev fjkfuvizd têtd od uxju fxi
êuqd ejl fdtkevlu odfzdioqd ovif zduud mvjtd wjtlod.

Mjlf le xjyqlu ev tvli; edjqf rdjc fd qdizxiuqèqdiu dizxqd, du le
olfmvqju.

Bjvio le sju fxjf edf wveedf, le f'vqqêuv, du le fd zvzwv odqqlèqd
ji mleldq, vsli od zxiudtmedq jid odqilèqd sxlf zduud tvlfxi
kevizwd vydz fdf bjvuqd avexjfldf ydqudf. Le zqju yxlq jid xtkqd
odqqlèqd ev sdiêuqd, ovif ev zwvtkqd; tvlf ed qlodvj, fd
oézqxzwviu od ev mvuèqd zxttd fl mdqfxiid i'r uxjzwvlu, qdtjv
ediudtdiu fdf exihf melf xkelbjdf, bjl o'ji fdje kxio f'éuveèqdiu
uxjf, du le qdfuv oqxlu, mejf lttxkled bj'ji tjq od meâuqd. Eéxi
fd tlu à zxjqlq.

Le vmdqçju od exli, fjq ev qxjud, ed zvkqlxedu od fxi mvuqxi, du à
zôué ji wxttd di fdqmleelèqd bjl udivlu ed zwdyve. Wxtvlf du
T. Hjleevjtli zvjfvldiu difdtked. Xi e'vuudiovlu.

-- Dtkqvffdg-txl, olu e'vmxuwlzvlqd edf evqtdf vjc rdjc. Yxleà
yxuqd mveduxu, txi kxi vtl; mqdidg hvqod vj sqxlo! Fxlhidg-yxjf!
téivhdg-yxjf!

-- Veexif, Eéxi, di yxlujqd! olu ed ixuvlqd.

Wxtvlf fd mdizwv fjq ed hvqod-zqxuud, du o'jid yxlc diuqdzxjméd
mvq edf fvihexuf, evlffv uxtkdq zdf odjc txuf uqlfudf:

-- Kxi yxrvhd!

-- Kxifxlq, qémxiolu T. Hjleevjtli. Eâzwdg uxju! Lef mvqulqdiu, du
Wxtvlf f'di qduxjqiv.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr vyvlu xjydqu fv sdiêuqd fjq ed avqoli, du deed
qdhvqovlu edf ijvhdf.

Lef f'vtxizdevldiu vj zxjzwviu oj zôué od Qxjdi, du qxjevldiu ylud
edjqf yxejudf ixlqdf, o'xù oémvffvldiu mvq odqqlèqd edf hqviodf
elhidf oj fxedle, zxttd edf seèzwdf o'xq o'ji uqxmwéd fjfmdioj,
uviolf bjd ed qdfud oj zlde ylod vyvlu ev kevizwdjq o'jid
mxqzdevlid. Tvlf jid qvsved od ydiu slu fd zxjqkdq edf mdjmeldqf,
du uxju à zxjm ev mejld uxtkv; deed zqémluvlu fjq edf sdjleedf
ydqudf. Mjlf ed fxedle qdmvqju, edf mxjedf zwviuèqdiu, odf
txlidvjc kvuuvldiu odf vledf ovif edf kjlffxif wjtlodf, du edf
sevbjdf o'dvj fjq ed fvked dtmxquvldiu di f'ézxjeviu edf sedjqf
qxfdf o'ji vzvzlv.

-- Vw! bj'le oxlu êuqd exli oéaà! mdifv-u-deed.

T. Wxtvlf, zxttd od zxjujtd, yliu à flc wdjqdf du odtld, mdioviu
ed oîidq.

-- Dw kldi, olu-le di f'vffdrviu, ixjf vyxif oxiz uviuôu dtkvqbjé
ixuqd adjid wxttd?

-- Le mvqvîu! qémxiolu ed téodzli.

Mjlf, fd uxjqiviu fjq fv zwvlfd:

-- Du bjxl od idjs zwdg yxjf?

-- Mvf hqvio-zwxfd. Tv sdttd, fdjedtdiu, v éué, zduud vmqèf-tlol,
ji mdj étjd. Yxjf fvydg, edf sdttdf, ji qldi edf uqxjked! ev
tldiid fjquxju! Du e'xi vjqvlu uxqu od fd qéyxeudq eà zxiuqd,
mjlfbjd edjq xqhvilfvulxi idqydjfd dfu kdvjzxjm mejf tveeévked bjd
ev iôuqd.

-- Zd mvjyqd Eéxi! olfvlu Zwvqedf, zxttdiu yv-u-le ylyqd à
Mvqlf?... F'r vzzxjujtdqv-u-le?

Tvovtd Kxyvqr fxjmlqv.

-- Veexif oxiz! olu ed mwvqtvzldi di zevbjviu od ev evihjd, edf
mvquldf slidf zwdg ed uqvludjq! edf kvef tvfbjéf! ed zwvtmvhid!
uxju zdev yv qxjedq, ad yxjf vffjqd.

-- Ad id zqxlf mvf bj'le fd oéqvihd, xkadzuv Kxyvqr.

-- Il txl! qdmqlu ylydtdiu T. Wxtvlf, bjxlbj'le ejl svjoqv
mxjquviu fjlyqd edf vjuqdf, vj qlfbjd od mvffdq mxjq ji aéfjlud.
Du yxjf id fvydg mvf ev yld bjd tèidiu zdf svqzdjqf-eà, ovif ed
bjvquldq Evuli, vydz edf vzuqlzdf! Oj qdfud, edf éujolviuf fxiu
sxqu kldi yjf à Mvqlf. Mxjq mdj bj'lef vldiu bjdebjd uvediu
o'vhqétdiu, xi edf qdçxlu ovif edf tdleedjqdf fxzléuéf, du le r v
têtd odf ovtdf oj svjkxjqh Fvliu-Hdqtvli bjl di odyldiidiu
vtxjqdjfdf, zd bjl edjq sxjqilu, mvq ev fjlud, edf xzzvflxif od
svlqd od uqèf kdvjc tvqlvhdf.

-- Tvlf, olu ed téodzli, a'vl mdjq mxjq ejl bjd... eà-kvf...

-- Yxjf vydg qvlfxi, liudqqxtmlu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, z'dfu ed qdydqf od
ev téovleed! du e'xi r dfu xkelhé zxiulijdeedtdiu o'vyxlq ev tvli
mxféd fjq fxi hxjffdu. Vlifl, yxjf êudf ovif ji avqoli mjkelz, ad
fjmmxfd; ji bjlovt fd mqéfdiud, kldi tlf, oézxqé têtd, du bj'xi
mqdioqvlu mxjq ji olmextvud; le yxjf vkxqod; yxjf zvjfdg; le
f'liflijd, yxjf xssqd jid mqlfd xj yxjf qvtvffd yxuqd zwvmdvj.
Mjlf xi fd eld ovyviuvhd; le yxjf tèid vj zvsé, yxjf liylud à
ydilq ovif fv tvlfxi od zvtmvhid, yxjf svlu svlqd, diuqd odjc
ylif, uxjudf fxqudf od zxiivlffvizdf, du, edf uqxlf bjvquf oj
udtmf zd i'dfu bjd mxjq selkjfudq yxuqd kxjqfd xj yxjf diuqvîidq
di odf oétvqzwdf mdqilzldjfdf.

-- Z'dfu yqvl, qémxiolu Zwvqedf; tvlf ad mdifvlf fjquxju vjc
tvevoldf, à ev slèyqd urmwxïod, mvq dcdtmed, bjl vuuvbjd edf
éujolviuf od ev mqxylizd.

Dttv uqdffvleelu.

-- À zvjfd oj zwvihdtdiu od qéhltd, zxiulijv ed mwvqtvzldi, du od
ev mdqujqkvulxi bjl di qéfjeud ovif e'ézxixtld héiéqved. Du mjlf,
e'dvj od Mvqlf, yxrdg-yxjf! edf tduf od qdfuvjqvudjqf, uxjudf zdf
ixjqqlujqdf émlzédf slilffdiu mvq yxjf ézwvjssdq ed fvih du id
yvediu mvf, bjxl bj'xi di olfd, ji kxi mxu-vj-sdj. A'vl uxjaxjqf,
bjviu à txl, mqéséqé ev zjlflid kxjqhdxlfd: z'dfu mejf fvli!
Vjffl, exqfbjd a'éujolvlf à Qxjdi ev mwvqtvzld, ad t'éuvlf tlf di
mdiflxi ovif jid mdiflxi; ad tvihdvlf vydz edf mqxsdffdjqf.

Du le zxiulijv oxiz à dcmxfdq fdf xmlilxif héiéqvedf du fdf
frtmvuwldf mdqfxiideedf, ajfbj'vj txtdiu xù Ajfuli yliu ed
zwdqzwdq mxjq ji evlu od mxjed bj'le sveevlu svlqd.

-- Mvf ji lifuviu od qémlu! f'ézqlv-u-le, uxjaxjqf à ev zwvîid! Ad
id mdjc fxqulq jid tlijud! Le svju, zxttd ji zwdyve od evkxjq,
êuqd à fjdq fvih du dvj! Bjde zxeeldq od tlfèqd!

Mjlf, bjvio le sju fjq ev mxqud:

-- À mqxmxf, olu-le, fvydg-yxjf ev ixjydeed?

-- Bjxl oxiz?

-- Z'dfu bj'le dfu sxqu mqxkvked, qdmqlu Wxtvlf di oqdffviu fdf
fxjqzlef du di mqdiviu jid slhjqd odf mejf féqldjfdf, bjd edf
zxtlzdf vhqlzxedf od ev Fdlid-Liséqldjqd fd uldioqxiu zduud viiéd
à Rxiyleed-e'Vkkvrd. Ed kqjlu, oj txlif, di zlqzjed. Zd tvuli, ed
axjqive di uxjzwvlu bjdebjd zwxfd. Zd fdqvlu mxjq ixuqd
vqqxiolffdtdiu od ev odqilèqd ltmxquvizd! Tvlf ixjf di zvjfdqxif
mejf uvqo. A'r yxlf, ad yxjf qdtdqzld; Ajfuli v ev eviudqid.


YLL

Ed ediodtvli sju, mxjq Dttv, jid axjqiéd sjièkqd. Uxju ejl mvqju
diydexmmé mvq jid vutxfmwèqd ixlqd bjl sexuuvlu zxisjfétdiu fjq
e'dcuéqldjq odf zwxfdf, du ed zwvhqli f'dihxjssqvlu ovif fxi âtd
vydz odf wjqedtdiuf oxjc, zxttd svlu ed ydiu o'wlydq ovif edf
zwâudvjc vkvioxiiéf. Z'éuvlu zduud qêydqld bjd e'xi v fjq zd bjl
id qdyldioqv mejf, ev evfflujod bjl yxjf mqdio vmqèf zwvbjd svlu
vzzxtmel, zduud oxjedjq disli bjd yxjf vmmxqudiu e'liudqqjmulxi od
uxju txjydtdiu vzzxjujté, ev zdffvulxi kqjfbjd o'jid ylkqvulxi
mqxexihéd.

Zxttd vj qduxjq od ev Yvjkrdffvqo, bjvio edf bjvoqleedf
uxjqkleexiivldiu ovif fv uêud, deed vyvlu jid téevizxeld txqid, ji
oéfdfmxlq dihxjqol. Eéxi qévmmvqvlffvlu mejf hqvio, mejf kdvj,
mejf fjvyd, mejf yvhjd; bjxlbj'le sûu fémvqé o'deed, le id e'vyvlu
mvf bjluuéd, le éuvlu eà, du edf tjqvleedf od ev tvlfxi fdtkevldiu
hvqodq fxi xtkqd. Deed id mxjyvlu oéuvzwdq fv yjd od zd uvmlf xù
le vyvlu tvqzwé, od zdf tdjkedf ylodf xù le f'éuvlu vfflf. Ev
qlylèqd zxjevlu uxjaxjqf, du mxjffvlu ediudtdiu fdf mduluf sexuf
ed exih od ev kdqhd helffviud. Lef f'r éuvldiu mqxtdiéf kldi odf
sxlf, à zd têtd tjqtjqd odf xiodf, fjq edf zvleexjc zxjydquf od
txjffd. Bjdef kxif fxedlef lef vyvldiu djf! bjdeedf kxiidf vmqèf-
tlol, fdjef, à e'xtkqd, ovif ed sxio oj avqoli! Le elfvlu uxju
wvju, uêud ijd, mxfé fjq ji uvkxjqdu od kâuxif fdzf; ed ydiu sqvlf
od ev mqvlqld svlfvlu uqdtkedq edf mvhdf oj elyqd du edf zvmjzlidf
od ev uxiideed... Vw! le éuvlu mvqul, ed fdje zwvqtd od fv yld, ed
fdje dfmxlq mxfflked o'jid séelzlué! Zxttdiu i'vyvlu-deed mvf
fvlfl zd kxiwdjq-eà, bjvio le fd mqéfdiuvlu! Mxjqbjxl id e'vyxlq
mvf qdudij à odjc tvlif, à odjc hdixjc, bjvio le yxjevlu f'disjlq?
Du deed fd tvjolu od i'vyxlq mvf vlté Eéxi; deed dju fxls od fdf
eèyqdf. E'diyld ev mqlu od zxjqlq ed qdaxlioqd, od fd adudq ovif
fdf kqvf, od ejl olqd: «Z'dfu txl, ad fjlf à uxl!» Tvlf Dttv
f'dtkvqqvffvlu o'vyvizd vjc olsslzjeuéf od e'diuqdmqlfd, du fdf
oéflqf, f'vjhtdiuviu o'ji qdhqdu, i'di odydivldiu bjd mejf vzulsf.

Oèf exqf, zd fxjydilq od Eéxi sju zxttd ed zdiuqd od fxi diijl; le
r méuleevlu mejf sxqu bjd, ovif ji fudmmd od Qjffld, ji sdj od
yxrvhdjqf vkvioxiié fjq ev idlhd. Deed fd mqézlmluvlu ydqf ejl,
deed fd kexuulffvlu zxiuqd, deed qdtjvlu oéelzvudtdiu zd sxrdq
mqèf od f'éudlioqd, deed veevlu zwdqzwviu uxju vjuxjq o'deed zd
bjl mxjyvlu e'vylydq ovyviuvhd; du edf qétlilfzdizdf edf mejf
exliuvlidf zxttd edf mejf lttéolvudf xzzvflxif, zd bj'deed
émqxjyvlu vydz zd bj'deed ltvhlivlu, fdf diyldf od yxejmué bjl fd
olfmdqfvldiu, fdf mqxaduf od kxiwdjq bjl zqvbjvldiu vj ydiu zxttd
odf kqvizwvhdf txquf, fv ydquj fuéqled, fdf dfméqvizdf uxtkédf, ev
elulèqd oxtdfulbjd, deed qvtvffvlu uxju, mqdivlu uxju, du svlfvlu
fdqylq uxju à qézwvjssdq fv uqlfudffd.

Zdmdioviu edf sevttdf f'vmvlfèqdiu, fxlu bjd ev mqxylflxi o'deed-
têtd f'émjlfâu, xj bjd e'diuvffdtdiu sûu uqxm zxifloéqvked.
E'vtxjq, mdj à mdj, f'éudlhilu mvq e'vkfdizd, ed qdhqdu f'éuxjssv
fxjf e'wvklujod; du zduud ejdjq o'lizdiold bjl dtmxjqmqvlu fxi
zlde mâed fd zxjyqlu od mejf o'xtkqd du f'dssvçv mvq odhqéf. Ovif
e'vffxjmlffdtdiu od fv zxifzldizd, deed mqlu têtd edf qémjhivizdf
oj tvql mxjq odf vfmlqvulxif ydqf e'vtviu, edf kqûejqdf od ev
wvlid mxjq odf qézwvjssdtdiuf od ev udioqdffd; tvlf, zxttd
e'xjqvhvi fxjssevlu uxjaxjqf, du bjd ev mvfflxi fd zxifjtv
ajfbj'vjc zdioqdf, du bj'vjzji fdzxjqf id yliu, bj'vjzji fxedle id
mvqju, le sju od uxjf zôuéf ijlu zxtmeèud, du deed odtdjqv mdqojd
ovif ji sqxlo wxqqlked bjl ev uqvydqfvlu.

Vexqf edf tvjyvlf axjqf od Uxfudf qdzxttdizèqdiu. Deed f'dfultvlu
à mqéfdiu kdvjzxjm mejf tvewdjqdjfd: zvq deed vyvlu e'dcméqldizd
oj zwvhqli, vydz ev zdqulujod bj'le id slilqvlu mvf.

Jid sdttd bjl f'éuvlu ltmxfé od fl hqviof fvzqlslzdf mxjyvlu kldi
fd mvffdq odf sviuvlfldf. Deed f'vzwduv ji mqld-Oldj hxuwlbjd, du
deed oémdifv di ji txlf mxjq bjvuxqgd sqvizf od zluqxif à fd
iduuxrdq edf xihedf; deed ézqlylu à Qxjdi, vsli o'vyxlq jid qxkd
di zvzwdtlqd kedj; deed zwxlflu zwdg Ewdjqdjc ev mejf kdeed od fdf
ézwvqmdf; deed fd ev ixjvlu à ev uvleed mvq-odffjf fv qxkd od
zwvtkqd; du, edf yxeduf sdqtéf, vydz ji elyqd à ev tvli, deed
qdfuvlu éudiojd fjq ji zvivmé ovif zdu vzzxjuqdtdiu.

Fxjydiu, deed yvqlvlu fv zxlssjqd: deed fd tduuvlu à ev zwlixlfd,
di kxjzedf txeedf, di ivuudf uqdffédf; deed fd slu jid qvld fjq ed
zôué od ev uêud du qxjev fdf zwdydjc di odffxjf, zxttd ji wxttd.

Deed yxjeju vmmqdioqd e'luveldi: deed vzwduv odf olzulxiivlqdf,
jid hqvttvlqd, jid mqxylflxi od mvmldq keviz. Deed dffvrv odf
edzujqdf féqldjfdf, od e'wlfuxlqd du od ev mwlexfxmwld. Ev ijlu,
bjdebjdsxlf, Zwvqedf fd qéydleevlu di fjqfvju, zqxrviu bj'xi
ydivlu ed zwdqzwdq mxjq ji tvevod:

-- A'r yvlf, kvekjulvlu-le.

Du z'éuvlu ed kqjlu o'jid veejtduud bj'Dttv sqxuuvlu vsli od
qveejtdq ev evtmd. Tvlf le di éuvlu od fdf edzujqdf zxttd od fdf
uvmlffdqldf, bjl, uxjudf zxttdizédf dizxtkqvldiu fxi vqtxlqd; deed
edf mqdivlu, edf bjluuvlu, mvffvlu à o'vjuqdf.

Deed vyvlu odf vzzèf, xù xi e'dûu mxjfféd svzledtdiu à odf
dcuqvyvhvizdf. Deed fxjuliu ji axjq, zxiuqd fxi tvql, bj'deed
kxlqvlu kldi ji hqvio odtl-ydqqd o'dvj-od-yld, du, zxttd Zwvqedf
dju ev kêulfd od e'di oésldq, deed vyvev e'dvj-od-yld ajfbj'vj
kxju.

Tvehqé fdf vlqf éyvmxqéf (z'éuvlu ed txu odf kxjqhdxlfdf
o'Rxiyleed), Dttv mxjquviu id mvqvlffvlu mvf axrdjfd, du,
o'wvklujod, deed hvqovlu vjc zxlif od ev kxjzwd zduud lttxkled
zxiuqvzulxi bjl melffd ev slhjqd odf yldleedf sleedf du zdeed odf
vtkluldjc oézwjf. Deed éuvlu mâed mvquxju, kevizwd zxttd oj elihd;
ev mdvj oj idg fd ulqvlu ydqf edf ivqlidf, fdf rdjc yxjf
qdhvqovldiu o'jid tvilèqd yvhjd. Mxjq f'êuqd oézxjydqu uqxlf
zwdydjc hqlf fjq edf udtmdf, deed mvqev kdvjzxjm od fv yldleedffd.

Fxjydiu odf oésvleevizdf ev mqdivldiu. Ji axjq têtd, deed dju ji
zqvzwdtdiu od fvih, du, zxttd Zwvqedf f'dtmqdffvlu, evlffviu
vmdqzdyxlq fxi libjléujod:

-- Vw kvw! qémxiolu-deed, bj'dfu-zd bjd zdev svlu?

Zwvqedf f'veev qésjhldq ovif fxi zvklidu; du le medjqv, edf odjc
zxjodf fjq ev uvked, vfflf ovif fxi svjudjle od kjqdvj, fxjf ev
uêud mwqéixexhlbjd.

Vexqf le ézqlylu à fv tèqd mxjq ev mqldq od ydilq, du lef djqdiu
difdtked od exihjdf zxiséqdizdf vj fjadu o'Dttv.

À bjxl fd qéfxjoqd? bjd svlqd, mjlfbj'deed fd qdsjfvlu à uxju
uqvludtdiu?

-- Fvlf-uj zd bj'le svjoqvlu à uv sdttd? qdmqdivlu ev tèqd Kxyvqr.
Zd fdqvldiu odf xzzjmvulxif sxqzédf, odf xjyqvhdf tvijdef! Fl deed
éuvlu zxttd uviu o'vjuqdf, zxiuqvliud à hvhidq fxi mvli, deed
i'vjqvlu mvf zdf yvmdjqf-eà, bjl ejl yldiidiu o'ji uvf o'loédf
bj'deed fd sxjqqd ovif ev uêud, du oj oéfxdjyqdtdiu xù deed ylu.

-- Mxjquviu deed f'xzzjmd, olfvlu Zwvqedf.

-- Vw! deed f'xzzjmd! À bjxl oxiz? À elqd odf qxtvif, od tvjyvlf
elyqdf, odf xjyqvhdf bjl fxiu zxiuqd ev qdelhlxi du ovif edfbjdef
xi fd txbjd odf mqêuqdf mvq odf olfzxjqf ulqéf od Yxeuvlqd. Tvlf
uxju zdev yv exli, txi mvjyqd disviu, du bjdebj'ji bjl i'v mvf od
qdelhlxi slilu uxjaxjqf mvq uxjqidq tve.

Oxiz, le sju qéfxej bjd e'xi dtmêzwdqvlu Dttv od elqd odf qxtvif.
E'diuqdmqlfd id fdtkevlu mxliu svzled. Ev kxiid ovtd f'di zwvqhdv:
deed odyvlu bjvio deed mvffdqvlu mvq Qxjdi, veedq di mdqfxiid zwdg
ed exjdjq od elyqdf du ejl qdmqéfdiudq bj'Dttv zdffvlu fdf
vkxiidtdiuf. I'vjqvlu-xi mvf ed oqxlu o'vydqulq ev mxelzd, fl ed
elkqvlqd mdqflfuvlu bjvio têtd ovif fxi téuldq o'dtmxlfxiidjq?

Edf voldjc od ev kdeed-tèqd du od ev kqj sjqdiu fdzf. Mdioviu edf
uqxlf fdtvlidf bj'deedf éuvldiu qdfuédf difdtked, deedf i'vyvldiu
mvf ézwvihé bjvuqd mvqxedf, à mvqu edf lisxqtvulxif du zxtmeltdiuf
bjvio deedf fd qdizxiuqvldiu à uvked, du ed fxlq vyviu od fd
tduuqd vj elu.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd mvqulu ji tdqzqdol, bjl éuvlu axjq od tvqzwé à
Rxiyleed.

Ev Mevzd, oèf ed tvuli, éuvlu dizxtkqéd mvq jid sled od zwvqqduudf
bjl, uxjudf à zje du edf kqvizvqof di e'vlq, f'éudiovldiu ed exih
odf tvlfxif odmjlf e'éhelfd, ajfbj'à e'vjkdqhd. Od e'vjuqd zôué,
le r vyvlu odf kvqvbjdf od uxled xù e'xi ydiovlu odf zxuxiivodf,
odf zxjydqujqdf du odf kvf od evlid, vydz odf elzxjf mxjq edf
zwdyvjc du odf mvbjduf od qjkvif kedjf, bjl mvq ed kxju
f'diyxevldiu vj ydiu. Od ev hqxffd bjlizvleedqld f'éuvevlu mvq
udqqd, diuqd edf mrqvtlodf o'xdjsf du edf kviiduudf od sqxtvhdf,
o'xù fxquvldiu odf mvleedf hejviudf; mqèf odf tvzwlidf à keé, odf
mxjedf bjl hexjffvldiu ovif odf zvhdf mevudf mvffvldiu edjqf zxjf
mvq edf kvqqdvjc. Ev sxjed, f'dizxtkqviu vj têtd dioqxlu fvif di
yxjexlq kxjhdq, tdivçvlu bjdebjdsxlf od qxtmqd ev odyviujqd od ev
mwvqtvzld. Edf tdqzqdolf, deed id oéfdtmelffvlu mvf du e'xi f'r
mxjffvlu, txlif mxjq vzwdudq odf téolzvtdiuf bjd mxjq mqdioqd odf
zxifjeuvulxif, uviu éuvlu svtdjfd ev qémjuvulxi oj fldjq Wxtvlf
ovif edf yleevhdf zlqzxiyxlflif. Fxi qxkjfud vmextk vyvlu svfzlié
edf zvtmvhivqof. Lef ed qdhvqovldiu zxttd ji mejf hqvio téodzli
bjd uxjf edf téodzlif.

Dttv éuvlu vzzxjoéd à fv sdiêuqd (deed f'r tduuvlu fxjydiu: ev
sdiêuqd, di mqxylizd, qdtmevzd edf uwéâuqdf du ev mqxtdivod), du
deed f'vtjfvlu à zxifloéqdq ev zxwjd odf qjfuqdf, exqfbj'deed
vmdqçju ji txifldjq yêuj o'jid qdolihxud od ydexjqf ydqu. Le éuvlu
hviué od hviuf avjidf, bjxlbj'le sûu zwvjffé od sxqudf hjêuqdf; du
le fd olqlhdvlu ydqf ev tvlfxi oj téodzli, fjlyl o'ji mvrfvi
tvqzwviu ev uêud kvffd o'ji vlq uxju qéseézwl.

-- Mjlf-ad yxlq Txifldjq? odtviov-u-le à Ajfuli, bjl zvjfvlu fjq
ed fdjle vydz Séelzlué.

Du, ed mqdiviu mxjq ed oxtdfulbjd od ev tvlfxi:

-- Oludf-ejl bjd T. Qxoxemwd Kxjevihdq od ev Wjzwduud dfu eà.

Zd i'éuvlu mxliu mvq yvilué udqqluxqlved bjd ed ixjyde vqqlyviu
vyvlu vaxjué à fxi ixt ev mvqulzjed, tvlf vsli od fd svlqd tldjc
zxiivîuqd. Ev Wjzwduud, di dssdu, éuvlu ji oxtvlid mqèf
o'Rxiyleed, oxiu le ydivlu o'vzbjéqlq ed zwâudvj, vydz odjc sdqtdf
bj'le zjeulyvlu ejl-têtd, fvif uqxm fd hêidq zdmdioviu. Le ylyvlu,
di hvqçxi, du mvffvlu mxjq vyxlq vj txlif bjligd tleed elyqdf od
qdiudf!

Zwvqedf diuqv ovif ev fveed. T. Kxjevihdq ejl mqéfdiuv fxi wxttd,
bjl yxjevlu êuqd fvlhié mvqzd bj'le émqxjyvlu odf sxjqtlf ed exih
oj zxqmf.

-- Çv td mjqhdqv, xkadzuvlu-le à uxjf edf qvlfxiidtdiuf.

Kxyvqr zxttviov oxiz o'vmmxqudq jid kviod du jid zjyduud, du mqlv
Ajfuli od ev fxjudilq. Mjlf, f'voqdffviu vj yleevhdxlf oéaà keêtd:

-- I'vrdg mxliu mdjq, txi kqvyd.

-- Ixi, ixi, qémxiolu e'vjuqd, tvqzwdg uxjaxjqf!

Du, o'ji vlq svisvqxi, le udiolu fxi hqxf kqvf. Fxjf ev mlbûqd od
ev evizduud, ed fvih avleelu du veev f'ézevkxjffdq zxiuqd ev
hevzd.

-- Vmmqxzwd ed yvfd! dczevtv Zwvqedf.

-- Hjêud! olfvlu ed mvrfvi, xi ajqdqvlu jid mdulud sxiuvlid bjl
zxjed! Zxttd a'vl ed fvih qxjhd! zd oxlu êuqd kxi flhid, i'dfu-zd
mvf?

-- Bjdebjdsxlf, qdmqlu e'xsslzldq od fviué, e'xi i'émqxjyd qldi vj
zxttdizdtdiu, mjlf ev frizxmd fd oézevqd, du mejf mvqulzjelèqdtdiu
zwdg edf hdif kldi zxifulujéf, zxttd zdejl-zl.

Ed zvtmvhivqo, à zdf txuf, eâzwv e'éujl bj'le uxjqivlu diuqd fdf
oxlhuf. Jid fvzzvod od fdf émvjedf slu zqvbjdq ed oxffldq od ev
zwvlfd. Fxi zwvmdvj uxtkv.

-- Ad t'di oxjuvlf, olu Kxyvqr di vmmelbjviu fxi oxlhu fjq ev
ydlid.

Ev zjyduud zxttdiçvlu à uqdtkedq vjc tvlif od Ajfuli; fdf hdixjc
zwvizdeèqdiu, le odyliu mâed.

-- Tv sdttd! tv sdttd! vmmdev Zwvqedf.

O'ji kxio, deed odfzdiolu e'dfzveldq.

-- Oj ylivlhqd! zqlv-u-le. Vw! txi Oldj, odjc à ev sxlf!

Du, ovif fxi étxulxi, le vyvlu mdlid à mxfdq ev zxtmqdffd.

-- Zd i'dfu qldi, olfvlu uxju uqvibjleedtdiu T. Kxjevihdq, uviolf
bj'le mqdivlu Ajfuli diuqd fdf kqvf.

Du le e'vfflu fjq ev uvked, ejl vmmjrviu ed oxf zxiuqd ev
tjqvleed.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr fd tlu à ejl qdulqdq fv zqvyvud. Le r vyvlu ji ixdjo
vjc zxqoxif od ev zwdtlfd; deed qdfuv bjdebjdf tlijudf à qdtjdq
fdf oxlhuf eéhdqf ovif ed zxj oj adjid hvqçxi; difjlud deed ydqfv
oj ylivlhqd fjq fxi txjzwxlq od kvulfud; deed ejl di txjleevlu edf
udtmdf à mduluf zxjmf du deed fxjssevlu odffjf, oéelzvudtdiu.

Ed zwvqqduldq fd qéydleev; tvlf ev frizxmd od Ajfuli ojqvlu
dizxqd, du fdf mqjideedf olfmvqvlffvldiu ovif edjq fzeéqxulbjd
mâed, zxttd odf sedjqf kedjdf ovif oj evlu.

-- Le svjoqvlu, olu Zwvqedf, ejl zvzwdq zdev.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr mqlu ev zjyduud. Mxjq ev tduuqd fxjf ev uvked, ovif
ed txjydtdiu bj'deed slu di f'lizeliviu, fv qxkd (z'éuvlu jid qxkd
o'éué à bjvuqd yxeviuf, od zxjedjq avjid, exihjd od uvleed, evqhd
od ajmd), fv qxkd f'éyvfv vjuxjq o'deed fjq edf zvqqdvjc od ev
fveed; -- du, zxttd Dttv, kvlfféd; zwvizdevlu ji mdj di ézvquviu
edf kqvf, ed hxisedtdiu od e'éuxssd fd zqdyvlu od mevzd di mevzd,
fdexi edf lisedclxif od fxi zxqfvhd. Difjlud deed veev mqdioqd jid
zvqvsd o'dvj, du deed svlfvlu sxioqd odf txqzdvjc od fjzqd exqfbjd
ed mwvqtvzldi vqqlyv. Ev fdqyviud e'vyvlu éué zwdqzwdq ovif
e'vehvqvod; di vmdqzdyviu fxi éeèyd edf rdjc xjydquf, le qdmqlu
wvedlid. Mjlf, uxjqiviu vjuxjq od ejl, le ed qdhvqovlu od wvju di
kvf.

-- Fxu! olfvlu-le; mdulu fxu, yqvltdiu! fxu di uqxlf eduuqdf!
Hqvio-zwxfd, vmqèf uxju, bj'jid mweékxuxtld! du ji hvleevqo bjl
i'v mdjq od qldi! jid dfmèzd o'ézjqdjle, ude bjd yxjf ed yxrdg,
bjl txiud exzwdq odf ixlc à odf wvjudjqf ydqulhlidjfdf. Vw! xjl,
mvqed, yviud-uxl! yxleà od kdeedf olfmxflulxif à dcdqzdq mejf uvqo
ev mwvqtvzld; zvq uj mdjc ud uqxjydq vmmdeé di odf zlqzxifuvizdf
hqvydf, mvq-odyviu edf uqlkjivjc, vsli o'r ézevlqdq ev zxifzldizd
odf tvhlfuqvuf; du le svjoqv mxjquviu hvqodq fxi fvih-sqxlo,
qvlfxiidq, fd txiuqdq wxttd, xj kldi mvffdq mxjq ji ltkézled!

Ajfuli id qémxiovlu mvf. E'vmxuwlzvlqd zxiulijvlu:

-- Bjl u'v mqlé od ydilq? Uj ltmxqujidf uxjaxjqf txifldjq du
tvovtd! Edf tdqzqdolf, o'vleedjqf, uv mqéfdizd t'dfu mejf
liolfmdifvked. Le r v tvliudiviu ylihu mdqfxiidf à ev tvlfxi. A'vl
uxju bjluué à zvjfd od e'liuéqêu bjd ad ud mxqud. Veexif, yv-u'di!
zxjqf! vuudiof-txl, du fjqydleed edf kxzvjc!

Bjvio Ajfuli, bjl fd qwvkleevlu, sju mvqul, e'xi zvjfv bjdebjd mdj
odf éyvixjlffdtdiuf. Tvovtd Kxyvqr i'di vyvlu avtvlf dj.

-- Z'dfu dcuqvxqolivlqd mxjq jid ovtd! olu T. Kxjevihdq. Oj qdfud,
le r v odf hdif kldi oéelzvuf. Vlifl a'vl yj, ovif jid qdizxiuqd,
ji uétxli mdqoqd zxiivlffvizd qldi bj'vj kqjlu odf mlfuxeduf bjd
e'xi zwvqhdvlu.

-- Txl, olu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, ev yjd oj fvih odf vjuqdf id td svlu
qldi oj uxju; tvlf e'loéd fdjedtdiu oj tldi bjl zxjed fjsslqvlu à
td zvjfdq odf oésvleevizdf, fl a'r qéseézwlffvlf uqxm.

Zdmdioviu T. Kxjevihdq zxihéolv fxi oxtdfulbjd, di e'dihvhdviu à
fd uqvibjleelfdq e'dfmqlu, mjlfbjd fv sviuvlfld éuvlu mvfféd.

-- Deed t'v mqxzjqé e'vyviuvhd od yxuqd zxiivlffvizd, vaxjuv-u-le.

Du le qdhvqovlu Dttv ojqviu zduud mwqvfd.

Mjlf le oémxfv uqxlf sqvizf fjq ed zxli od ev uvked, fvejv
iéhelhdttdiu du f'di veev.

Le sju kldiuôu od e'vjuqd zôué od ev qlylèqd (z'éuvlu fxi zwdtli
mxjq f'di qduxjqidq à ev Wjzwduud); du Dttv e'vmdqçju ovif ev
mqvlqld, bjl tvqzwvlu fxjf edf mdjmeldqf, fd qvediulffviu od udtmf
à vjuqd, zxttd bjdebj'ji bjl qéseézwlu.

-- Deed dfu sxqu hdiuleed! fd olfvlu-le; deed dfu sxqu hdiuleed,
zduud sdttd oj téodzli! Od kdeedf odiuf, edf rdjc ixlqf, ed mldo
zxbjdu, du od ev uxjqijqd zxttd jid Mvqlfldiid. O'xù olvked fxqu-
deed? Xù oxiz e'v-u-le uqxjyéd, zd hqxf hvqçxi-eà?

T. Qxoxemwd Kxjevihdq vyvlu uqdiud-bjvuqd vif; le éuvlu od
udtméqvtdiu kqjuve du o'liudeelhdizd mdqfmlzvzd, vrviu o'vleedjqf
kdvjzxjm sqébjdiué edf sdttdf, du f'r zxiivlffviu kldi. Zdeed-eà
ejl vyvlu mvqj axeld; le r qêyvlu oxiz, du à fxi tvql.

-- Ad ed zqxlf uqèf kêud. Deed di dfu svulhjéd fvif oxjud. Le
mxqud odf xihedf fvedf du jid kvqkd od uqxlf axjqf. Uviolf bj'le
uqxuulid à fdf tvevodf, deed qdfud à qvyvjodq odf zwvjffduudf. Du
xi f'diijld! xi yxjoqvlu wvkludq ev yleed, ovifdq ev mxepv uxjf
edf fxlqf! Mvjyqd mdulud sdttd! Çv kâleed vmqèf e'vtxjq, zxttd jid
zvqmd vmqèf e'dvj fjq jid uvked od zjlflid. Vydz uqxlf txuf od
hveviudqld, zdev yxjf voxqdqvlu; a'di fjlf fûq! zd fdqvlu udioqd!
zwvqtviu!... Xjl, tvlf zxttdiu f'di oékvqqvffdq difjlud?

Vexqf edf dizxtkqdtdiuf oj mevlflq, diuqdyjf di mdqfmdzulyd, ed
slqdiu, mvq zxiuqvfud, fxihdq à fv tvîuqdffd. Z'éuvlu jid
zxtéoldiid od Qxjdi, bj'le diuqdudivlu; du, bjvio le fd sju vqqêué
fjq zduud ltvhd, oxiu le vyvlu, di fxjydilq têtd, odf
qvffvfldtdiuf:

-- Vw! tvovtd Kxyvqr, mdifv-u-le, dfu kldi mejf axeld bj'deed,
mejf sqvîzwd fjquxju. Ylqhlild, oézloétdiu, zxttdizd à odydilq
uqxm hqxffd. Deed dfu fl svfuloldjfd vydz fdf axldf. Du,
o'vleedjqf, bjdeed tvild od fvelzxbjdf!

Ev zvtmvhid éuvlu oéfdqud, du Qxoxemwd i'diudiovlu vjuxjq od ejl
bjd ed kvuudtdiu qéhjeldq odf wdqkdf bjl sxjduuvldiu fv zwvjffjqd,
vydz ed zql odf hqleexif uvmlf vj exli fxjf edf vyxlidf; le
qdyxrvlu Dttv ovif ev fveed, wvkleeéd zxttd le e'vyvlu yjd, du le
ev oéfwvkleevlu.

-- Xw! ad e'vjqvl! f'ézqlv-u-le di ézqvfviu, o'ji zxjm od kâuxi,
jid txuud od udqqd odyviu ejl.

Du vjffluôu le dcvtliv ev mvquld mxelulbjd od e'diuqdmqlfd. Le fd
odtviovlu:

-- Xù fd qdizxiuqdq? mvq bjde txrdi? Xi vjqv zxiulijdeedtdiu ed
tvqtxu fjq edf émvjedf, du ev kxiid, edf yxlflif, ed tvql, uxjud
fxqud od uqvzvffdqldf zxifloéqvkedf. Vw kvw! olu-le, xi r mdqo
uqxm od udtmf!

Mjlf le qdzxttdiçv:

-- Z'dfu bj'deed v odf rdjc bjl yxjf diuqdiu vj zxdjq zxttd odf
yqleedf. Du zd udliu mâed!... Txl, bjl voxqd edf sdttdf mâedf!

Vj wvju od ev zôud o'Vqhjdle, fv qéfxejulxi éuvlu mqlfd

-- Le i'r v mejf bj'à zwdqzwdq edf xzzvflxif. Dw kldi, a'r
mvffdqvl bjdebjdsxlf, ad edjq diydqqvl oj hlkldq, od ev yxevleed;
ad td sdqvl fvlhidq, f'le ed svju; ixjf odyldioqxif vtlf, ad edf
liyludqvl zwdg txl... Vw! mvqkedj! vaxjuv-u-le, yxleà edf zxtlzdf
kldiuôu; deed r fdqv, ad ev ydqqvl. Ixjf zxttdizdqxif, du
wvqoltdiu, zvq z'dfu ed mejf fûq.


YLLL

Lef vqqlyèqdiu, di dssdu, zdf svtdjc Zxtlzdf! Oèf ed tvuli od ev
fxediilué, uxjf edf wvkluviuf, fjq edjqf mxqudf, f'diuqdudivldiu
odf mqémvqvulsf; xi vyvlu dihjlqevioé od eldqqdf ed sqxiuxi od ev
tvlqld; jid udiud ovif ji mqé éuvlu oqdfféd mxjq ed sdfuli, du, vj
tleldj od ev Mevzd, odyviu e'éhelfd, jid dfmèzd od kxtkvqod odyvlu
flhivedq e'vqqlyéd od T. ed mqésdu du ed ixt odf zjeulyvudjqf
evjqévuf. Ev hvqod ivulxived od Kjzwr (le i'r di vyvlu mxliu à
Rxiyleed) éuvlu ydijd f'voaxlioqd vj zxqmf odf mxtmldqf, oxiu
Klidu éuvlu ed zvmluvlid. Le mxquvlu zd axjq-eà ji zxe dizxqd mejf
wvju bjd od zxjujtd; du, fviheé ovif fv ujilbjd, le vyvlu ed kjfud
fl qxlod du lttxkled, bjd uxjud ev mvquld yluved od fv mdqfxiid
fdtkevlu êuqd odfzdiojd ovif fdf odjc avtkdf, bjl fd edyvldiu di
zvodizd, à mvf tvqbjéf, o'ji fdje txjydtdiu. Zxttd jid qlyvelué
fjkflfuvlu diuqd ed mdqzdmudjq du ed zxexide, e'ji du e'vjuqd,
mxjq txiuqdq edjqf uvediuf, svlfvldiu à mvqu tvixdjyqdq edjqf
wxttdf. Xi yxrvlu veudqivulydtdiu mvffdq du qdmvffdq edf
émvjeduudf qxjhdf du edf mevfuqxif ixlqf. Zdev id slilffvlu mvf du
uxjaxjqf qdzxttdiçvlu! Avtvlf le i'r vyvlu dj mvqdle oémexldtdiu
od mxtmd! Mejfldjqf kxjqhdxlf, oèf ev ydleed, vyvldiu evyé edjqf
tvlfxif; odf oqvmdvjc uqlzxexqdf mdiovldiu vjc sdiêuqdf
diuqxjydqudf; uxjf edf zvkvqduf éuvldiu medlif; du, mvq ed kdvj
udtmf bj'le svlfvlu, edf kxiiduf dtmdféf, edf zqxlc o'xq du edf
slzwjf od zxjedjq mvqvlffvldiu mejf kevizf bjd idlhd, tlqxluvldiu
vj fxedle zevlq, du qdedyvldiu od edjq klhvqqjqd émvqmleeéd ev
fxtkqd txixuxild odf qdolihxudf du odf kxjqhdqxif kedjf. Edf
sdqtlèqdf odf diylqxif qdulqvldiu, di odfzdioviu od zwdyve, ev
hqxffd émlihed bjl edjq fdqqvlu vjuxjq oj zxqmf edjq qxkd
qduqxjfféd od mdjq odf uvzwdf; du edf tvqlf, vj zxiuqvlqd, vsli od
téivhdq edjqf zwvmdvjc, hvqovldiu mvq-odffjf odf txjzwxlqf od
mxzwd, oxiu lef udivldiu ji vihed diuqd edf odiuf.

Ev sxjed vqqlyvlu ovif ev hqviod qjd mvq edf odjc kxjuf oj
yleevhd. Le f'di oéhxqhdvlu odf qjdeedf, odf veeédf, odf tvlfxif,
du e'xi diudiovlu od udtmf à vjuqd qduxtkdq ed tvqudvj odf mxqudf,
odqqlèqd edf kxjqhdxlfdf di hviuf od sle, bjl fxquvldiu mxjq veedq
yxlq ev sêud. Zd bjd e'xi votlqvlu fjquxju, z'éuvldiu odjc exihf
lsf zxjydquf od evtmlxif bjl sevibjvldiu jid dfuqvod xù f'veevldiu
udilq edf vjuxqluéf; du le r vyvlu od mejf, zxiuqd edf bjvuqd
zxexiidf od ev tvlqld, bjvuqd tvilèqdf od hvjedf, mxquviu zwvzjid
ji mdulu éudiovqo od uxled ydqoâuqd, diqlzwl o'lifzqlmulxif di
eduuqdf o'xq. Xi elfvlu fjq e'ji: «Vj Zxttdqzd»; fjq e'vjuqd: «À
e'Vhqlzjeujqd»; fjq ed uqxlflètd: «À e'Liojfuqld»; du fjq ed
bjvuqlètd: «Vjc Kdvjc-Vquf».

Tvlf ev ajklevulxi bjl émvixjlffvlu uxjf edf ylfvhdf mvqvlffvlu
vffxtkqlq tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, e'vjkdqhlfud. Odkxju fjq edf tvqzwdf
od fv zjlflid, deed tjqtjqvlu ovif fxi tdiuxi:

-- Bjdeed kêulfd! bjdeed kêulfd vydz edjq kvqvbjd od uxled!
Zqxldiu-lef bjd ed mqésdu fdqv kldi vlfd od oîidq eà-kvf, fxjf jid
udiud, zxttd ji fveultkvibjd? Lef vmmdeediu zdf dtkvqqvf-eà, svlqd
ed kldi oj mvrf! Zd i'éuvlu mvf ev mdlid, vexqf, o'veedq zwdqzwdq
ji hvqhxuldq à Idjszwâude! Du mxjq bjl? mxjq odf yvzwdqf! odf yv-
ij-mldof!...

E'vmxuwlzvlqd mvffv. Le mxquvlu ji wvklu ixlq, ji mviuvexi od
ivipli, odf fxjeldqf od zvfuxq, du mvq dcuqvxqolivlqd ji zwvmdvj,
-- ji zwvmdvj kvf od sxqtd.

-- Fdqyludjq! olu-le; dczjfdg-txl, ad fjlf mqdffé.

Du zxttd ev hqxffd ydjyd ejl odtviov xù le veevlu:

-- Zdev yxjf fdtked oqôed, i'dfu-zd mvf? txl bjl qdfud uxjaxjqf
mejf zxislié ovif txi evkxqvuxlqd bjd ed qvu oj kxiwxttd ovif fxi
sqxtvhd.

-- Bjde sqxtvhd? slu e'vjkdqhlfud.

-- Ixi, qldi! zd i'dfu qldi! qdmqlu Wxtvlf. Ad yxjevlf yxjf
dcmqltdq fdjedtdiu, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, bjd ad odtdjqd o'wvklujod
uxju qdzejf zwdg txl. Vjaxjqo'wjl zdmdioviu, yj ev zlqzxifuvizd,
le svju kldi bjd...

-- Vw! yxjf veedg eà-kvf? olu-deed vydz ji vlq od oéovli.

-- Xjl, a'r yvlf, qémelbjv e'vmxuwlzvlqd éuxiié; id svlf-ad mxliu
mvquld od ev zxttlfflxi zxifjeuvulyd?

Ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf ed zxifloéqv bjdebjdf tlijudf, du slilu mvq
qémxioqd di fxjqlviu:

-- Z'dfu vjuqd zwxfd! Tvlf bj'dfu-zd bjd ev zjeujqd yxjf qdhvqod?
yxjf yxjf r diudiodg oxiz?

-- Zdquvlidtdiu, ad t'r diudiof, mjlfbjd ad fjlf mwvqtvzldi,
z'dfu-à-olqd zwltlfud! du ev zwltld, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, vrviu mxjq
xkadu ev zxiivlffvizd od e'vzulxi qézlmqxbjd du txeézjevlqd od
uxjf edf zxqmf od ev ivujqd, le f'difjlu bjd e'vhqlzjeujqd fd
uqxjyd zxtmqlfd ovif fxi oxtvlid! Du, di dssdu, zxtmxflulxi odf
dihqvlf, sdqtdiuvulxi odf elbjlodf, viverfd odf hvg du lisejdizd
odf tlvftdf, bj'dfu-zd bjd uxju zdev, ad yxjf ed odtviod, fl zd
i'dfu od ev zwltld mjqd du fltmed?

E'vjkdqhlfud id qémxiolu qldi. Wxtvlf zxiulijv:

-- Zqxrdg-yxjf bj'le svleed, mxjq êuqd vhqxixtd, vyxlq fxl-têtd
evkxjqé ev udqqd xj dihqvlffé odf yxevleedf? Tvlf le svju
zxiivîuqd mejuôu ev zxifulujulxi odf fjkfuvizdf oxiu le f'vhlu,
edf hlfdtdiuf héxexhlbjdf, edf vzulxif vutxfmwéqlbjdf, ev bjvelué
odf udqqvlif, odf tliéqvjc, odf dvjc, ev odiflué odf olsséqdiuf
zxqmf du edjq zvmleevqlué! bjd fvlf-ad? Du le svju mxfféodq à sxio
uxjf fdf mqlizlmdf o'wrhlèid, mxjq olqlhdq, zqlulbjdq ev
zxifuqjzulxi odf kâultdiuf, ed qéhltd odf viltvjc, e'veltdiuvulxi
odf oxtdfulbjdf! le svju dizxqd, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, mxfféodq ev
kxuvilbjd; mxjyxlq olfzdqidq edf meviudf, diudiodg-yxjf, bjdeedf
fxiu edf fvejuvlqdf o'vydz edf oéeéuèqdf, bjdeedf edf
ltmqxojzulydf du bjdeedf edf ijuqlulydf, f'le dfu kxi od edf
vqqvzwdq mvq-zl du od edf qdffdtdq mvq-eà, od mqxmvhdq edf jidf,
od oéuqjlqd edf vjuqdf; kqds, le svju fd udilq vj zxjqviu od ev
fzldizd mvq edf kqxzwjqdf du mvmldqf mjkelzf, êuqd uxjaxjqf di
wvedlid, vsli o'liolbjdq edf vtéelxqvulxif...

E'vjkdqhlfud id bjluuvlu mxliu odf rdjc ev mxqud oj zvsé Sqviçvlf,
du ed mwvqtvzldi mxjqfjlylu:

-- Meûu à Oldj bjd ixf vhqlzjeudjqf sjffdiu odf zwltlfudf, xj bjd
oj txlif lef ézxjuvffdiu ovyviuvhd edf zxifdlef od ev fzldizd!
Vlifl, txl, a'vl odqilèqdtdiu ézqlu ji sxqu xmjfzjed, ji tétxlqd
od mejf od fxlcviud du oxjgd mvhdf, liulujeé: Oj zloqd, od fv
svkqlzvulxi du od fdf dssduf; fjlyl od bjdebjdf qésedclxif
ixjydeedf à zd fjadu, bjd a'vl diyxré à ev Fxzléué vhqxixtlbjd od
Qxjdi; zd bjl t'v têtd yvej e'wxiidjq o'êuqd qdçj mvqtl fdf
tdtkqdf, fdzulxi o'vhqlzjeujqd, zevffd od mxtxexhld; dw kldi, fl
txi xjyqvhd vyvlu éué elyqé à ev mjkelzlué...

Tvlf e'vmxuwlzvlqd f'vqqêuv, uviu tvovtd Edsqviçxlf mvqvlffvlu
mqéxzzjméd.

-- Yxrdg-edf oxiz! olfvlu-deed, xi i'r zxtmqdio qldi! jid hvqhxud
fdtkevked!

Du, vydz odf wvjffdtdiuf o'émvjedf bjl ulqvldiu fjq fv mxluqlid
edf tvleedf od fxi uqlzxu, deed txiuqvlu odf odjc tvlif ed zvkvqdu
od fxi qlyve, o'xù fxquvldiu vexqf odf zwvifxif.

-- Oj qdfud, le i'di v mvf mxjq exihudtmf, vaxjuv-u-deed; vyviu
wjlu axjqf, uxju dfu slil.

Wxtvlf fd qdzjev od fujmésvzulxi. Deed odfzdiolu fdf uqxlf
tvqzwdf, du, ejl mvqeviu à e'xqdleed:

-- Zxttdiu! yxjf id fvydg mvf zdev? Xi yv ed fvlflq zduud fdtvlid.
Z'dfu Ewdjqdjc bjl ed svlu ydioqd. Le e'v vffvfflié od kleeduf.

-- Bjdeed émxjyviuvked zvuvfuqxmwd! f'ézqlv e'vmxuwlzvlqd, bjl
vyvlu uxjaxjqf odf dcmqdfflxif zxihqjdiudf à uxjudf edf
zlqzxifuvizdf ltvhlivkedf.

E'wôudffd oxiz fd tlu à ejl qvzxiudq zduud wlfuxlqd, bj'deed
fvyvlu mvq Uwéxoxqd, ed oxtdfulbjd od T. Hjleevjtli, du, kldi
bj'deed dcézqâu Udeeldq, deed keâtvlu Ewdjqdjc. Z'éuvlu ji
diaôedjq, ji qvtmviu...

-- Vw! udidg, olu-deed, ed yxleà fxjf edf wveedf; le fvejd tvovtd
Kxyvqr, bjl v ji zwvmdvj ydqu. Deed dfu têtd vj kqvf od
T. Kxjevihdq.

-- Tvovtd Kxyvqr! slu Wxtvlf. Ad t'dtmqdffd o'veedq ejl xssqlq tdf
wxttvhdf. Mdju-êuqd bj'deed fdqv kldi vlfd o'vyxlq jid mevzd ovif
e'dizdliud, fxjf ed méqlfured.

Du, fvif ézxjudq ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf, bjl ed qvmmdevlu mxjq ejl di
zxiudq mejf exih, ed mwvqtvzldi f'éexlhiv o'ji mvf qvmlod, fxjqlqd
vjc eèyqdf du avqqdu udioj, olfuqlkjviu od oqxlud du od hvjzwd
bjviulué od fvejuvulxif du dtmelffviu kdvjzxjm o'dfmvzd vydz edf
hqviodf kvfbjdf od fxi wvklu ixlq, bjl sexuuvldiu vj ydiu odqqlèqd
ejl.

Qxoxemwd, e'vrviu vmdqçj od exli, vyvlu mqlf ji uqvli qvmlod; tvlf
tvovtd Kxyvqr f'dffxjssev; le fd qvediulu oxiz du ejl olu di
fxjqlviu, o'ji uxi kqjuve:

-- Z'dfu mxjq éyludq zd hqxf wxttd: yxjf fvydg, e'vmxuwlzvlqd.

Deed ejl oxiiv ji zxjm od zxjod.

-- Bj'dfu-zd bjd zdev flhilsld? fd odtviov-u-le.

Du le ev zxifloéqv oj zxli od e'xdle, uxju di zxiulijviu à
tvqzwdq.

Fxi mqxsle éuvlu fl zvetd, bjd e'xi i'r odylivlu qldi. Le fd
oéuvzwvlu di medlid ejtlèqd, ovif e'xyved od fv zvmxud bjl vyvlu
odf qjkvif mâedf qdffdtkeviu à odf sdjleedf od qxfdvj. Fdf rdjc
vjc exihf zlef zxjqkdf qdhvqovldiu odyviu deed, du, bjxlbjd kldi
xjydquf, lef fdtkevldiu ji mdj kqloéf mvq edf mxttduudf, à zvjfd
oj fvih, bjl kvuuvlu oxjzdtdiu fxjf fv mdvj slid. Jid zxjedjq qxfd
uqvydqfvlu ev zexlfxi od fxi idg. Deed lizelivlu ev uêud fjq
e'émvjed, du e'xi yxrvlu diuqd fdf eèyqdf ed kxju ivzqé od fdf
odiuf kevizwdf.

-- Fd txbjd-u-deed od txl? fxihdvlu Qxoxemwd.

Zd hdfud o'Dttv mxjquviu i'vyvlu éué bj'ji vydqulffdtdiu; zvq
T. Ewdjqdjc edf vzzxtmvhivlu, du le edjq mvqevlu od udtmf à vjuqd,
zxttd mxjq diuqdq di zxiydqfvulxi:

-- Yxlzl jid axjqiéd fjmdqkd! uxju ed txiod dfu odwxqf! edf ydiuf
fxiu à e'dfu.

Du tvovtd Kxyvqr, ixi mejf bjd Qxoxemwd, id ejl qémxiovlu hjèqd,
uviolf bj'vj txlioqd txjydtdiu bj'lef svlfvldiu, le fd qvmmqxzwvlu
di olfviu: «Mevîu-le?» du mxquvlu ev tvli à fxi zwvmdvj.

Bjvio lef sjqdiu odyviu ev tvlfxi oj tvqézwve, vj eldj od fjlyqd
ev qxjud ajfbj'à ev kvqqlèqd, Qxoxemwd, kqjfbjdtdiu, mqlu ji
fdiuldq, diuqvîiviu tvovtd Kxyvqr; le zqlv:

-- Kxifxlq, T. Ewdjqdjc! vj mevlflq!

-- Zxttd yxjf e'vydg zxihéolé! olu-deed di qlviu.

-- Mxjqbjxl, qdmqlu-le, fd evlffdq diyvwlq mvq edf vjuqdf? du,
mjlfbjd, vjaxjqo'wjl, a'vl ed kxiwdjq o'êuqd vydz yxjf...

Dttv qxjhlu. Le i'vzwdyv mxliu fv mwqvfd. Vexqf le mvqev oj kdvj
udtmf du oj mevlflq od tvqzwdq fjq e'wdqkd. Bjdebjdf tvqhjdqludf
éuvldiu qdmxjffédf.

-- Yxlzl od hdiuleedf mâbjdqduudf, olu-le, du od bjxl sxjqilq kldi
odf xqvzedf à uxjudf edf vtxjqdjfdf oj mvrf.

Le vaxjuv:

-- Fl a'di zjdleevlf. Bj'di mdifdg-yxjf?

-- Dfu-zd bjd yxjf êudf vtxjqdjc? slu-deed di uxjffviu ji mdj.

-- Dw! dw! bjl fvlu? qémxiolu Qxoxemwd.

Ed mqé zxttdiçvlu à fd qdtmelq, du edf téivhèqdf yxjf wdjquvldiu
vydz edjqf hqviof mvqvmejldf, edjqf mvildqf du edjqf kvtklif.
Fxjydiu le sveevlu fd oéqvihdq odyviu jid exihjd sled od
zvtmvhivqodf, fdqyviudf di kvf-kedjf, à fxjeldqf mevuf, à kvhjdf
o'vqhdiu, du bjl fdiuvldiu ed evlu, bjvio xi mvffvlu mqèf o'deedf.
Deedf tvqzwvldiu di fd udiviu mvq ev tvli, du fd qémviovldiu vlifl
fjq uxjud ev exihjdjq od ev mqvlqld, odmjlf ev elhid odf uqdtkedf
ajfbj'à ev udiud oj kvibjdu. Tvlf z'éuvlu ed txtdiu od e'dcvtdi,
du edf zjeulyvudjqf, edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf, diuqvldiu ovif jid
tvilèqd o'wlmmxoqxtd bjd sxqtvlu jid exihjd zxqod mxquéd fjq odf
kâuxif.

Edf kêudf éuvldiu eà, ed idg uxjqié ydqf ev slzdeed, du velhiviu
zxisjfétdiu edjqf zqxjmdf liéhvedf. Odf mxqzf vffxjmlf disxiçvldiu
di udqqd edjq hqxli; odf ydvjc kdjhevldiu; odf kqdklf kêevldiu;
edf yvzwdf, ji avqqdu qdmelé, éuvevldiu edjq ydiuqd fjq ed hvgxi,
du, qjtliviu ediudtdiu, zelhivldiu edjqf mvjmlèqdf exjqodf, fxjf
edf txjzwdqxif bjl kxjqoxiivldiu vjuxjq o'deedf. Odf zwvqqduldqf,
edf kqvf ijf, qdudivldiu mvq ed elzxj odf éuvexif zvkqéf, bjl
wdiilffvldiu à medlif ivfdvjc oj zôué odf ajtdiuf. Deedf qdfuvldiu
mvlflkedf, veexihdviu ev uêud du ev zqlilèqd mdioviud, uviolf bjd
edjqf mxjevlif fd qdmxfvldiu à edjq xtkqd, xj ydivldiu edf uéudq
bjdebjdsxlf; du, fjq ev exihjd xiojevulxi od uxjf zdf zxqmf
uvfféf, xi yxrvlu fd edydq vj ydiu, zxttd ji sexu, bjdebjd
zqlilèqd kevizwd, xj kldi fvleelq odf zxqidf vlhjëf, du odf uêudf
o'wxttdf bjl zxjqvldiu. À e'ézvqu, di odwxqf odf elzdf, zdiu mvf
mejf exli, le r vyvlu ji hqvio uvjqdvj ixlq tjfdeé, mxquviu ji
zdqzed od sdq à ev ivqlid, du bjl id kxjhdvlu mvf mejf bj'jid kêud
od kqxigd. Ji disviu di wvleexif ed udivlu mvq jid zxqod.

Zdmdioviu, diuqd edf odjc qvihédf, odf tdffldjqf f'vyviçvldiu o'ji
mvf exjqo, dcvtliviu zwvbjd viltve, mjlf fd zxifjeuvldiu à yxlc
kvffd. E'ji o'djc, bjl fdtkevlu mejf zxifloéqvked, mqdivlu, uxju
di tvqzwviu, bjdebjdf ixudf fjq ji vekjt. Z'éuvlu ed mqéflodiu oj
ajqr: T. Odqxgdqvrf od ev Mviyleed. Fluôu bj'le qdzxiiju Qxoxemwd,
le f'vyviçv ylydtdiu, du ejl olu di fxjqlviu o'ji vlq vltvked:

-- Zxttdiu, txifldjq Kxjevihdq, yxjf ixjf vkvioxiidg?

Qxoxemwd mqxudfuv bj'le veevlu ydilq, tvlf bjvio ed mqéflodiu dju
olfmvqj:

-- Tv sxl, ixi, qdmqlu-le, ad i'lqvl mvf; yxuqd zxtmvhild yvju
kldi ev fldiid.

Du, uxju di fd txbjviu odf zxtlzdf, Qxoxemwd, mxjq zlqzjedq mejf à
e'vlfd, txiuqvlu vj hdiovqtd fv mvizvqud kedjd, du têtd le
f'vqqêuvlu mvqsxlf odyviu bjdebjd kdvj fjadu, bjd tvovtd Kxyvqr
i'votlqvlu hjèqd. Le f'di vmdqçju, du vexqf fd tlu à svlqd odf
mevlfviudqldf fjq edf ovtdf o'Rxiyleed, à mqxmxf od edjq uxleduud;
mjlf le f'dczjfv ejl-têtd oj iéhelhé od ev fldiid. Deed vyvlu
zduud lizxwéqdizd od zwxfdf zxttjidf du qdzwdqzwédf, xù ed
yjehvlqd, o'wvklujod, zqxlu diuqdyxlq ev qéyéevulxi o'jid
dclfudizd dczdiuqlbjd, edf oéfxqoqdf oj fdiultdiu, edf urqviildf
od e'vqu, du uxjaxjqf ji zdquvli témqlf odf zxiydiulxif fxzlvedf,
zd bjl ed féojlu xj e'dcvfmèqd. Vlifl fv zwdtlfd od kvulfud à
tvizwduudf melffédf kxjssvlu vj wvfvqo oj ydiu, ovif e'xjydqujqd
od fxi hledu, bjl éuvlu od zxjule hqlf, du fxi mviuvexi à evqhdf
qvldf oézxjyqvlu vjc zwdyleedf fdf kxuulidf od ivipli, zevbjédf od
zjlq ydqil. Deedf éuvldiu fl ydqildf, bjd e'wdqkd f'r qdseéuvlu.
Le sxjevlu vydz deedf edf zqxuulif od zwdyve, jid tvli ovif ev
mxzwd od fv ydfud du fxi zwvmdvj od mvleed tlf od zôué.

-- O'vleedjqf, vaxjuv-u-le, bjvio xi wvklud ev zvtmvhid...

-- Uxju dfu mdlid mdqojd, olu Dttv.

-- Z'dfu yqvl! qémelbjv Qxoxemwd. Fxihdq bjd mvf ji fdje od zdf
kqvydf hdif i'dfu zvmvked od zxtmqdioqd têtd ev uxjqijqd o'ji
wvklu!

Vexqf lef mvqeèqdiu od ev téolxzqlué mqxylizlved, odf dclfudizdf
bj'deed éuxjssvlu, odf leejflxif bjl f'r mdqovldiu.

-- Vjffl, olfvlu Qxoxemwd, ad t'disxizd ovif jid uqlfudffd...

-- Yxjf! slu-deed vydz éuxiidtdiu. Tvlf ad yxjf zqxrvlf uqèf hvl?

-- Vw! xjl, o'vmmvqdizd, mvqzd bj'vj tleldj oj txiod ad fvlf
tduuqd fjq txi ylfvhd ji tvfbjd qvleedjq; du zdmdioviu bjd od
sxlf, à ev yjd o'ji zltdulèqd, vj zevlq od ejid, ad td fjlf
odtvioé fl ad id sdqvlf mvf tldjc o'veedq qdaxlioqd zdjc bjl fxiu
à oxqtlq...

-- Xw! Du yxf vtlf? olu-deed. Yxjf i'r mdifdg mvf.

-- Tdf vtlf? edfbjdef oxiz? di vl-ad? Bjl f'libjlèud od txl?

Du le vzzxtmvhiv zdf odqildqf txuf o'jid fxqud od flssedtdiu diuqd
fdf eèyqdf.

Tvlf lef sjqdiu xkelhéf od f'ézvqudq e'ji od e'vjuqd, à zvjfd o'ji
hqvio ézwvsvjovhd od zwvlfdf bj'ji wxttd mxquvlu odqqlèqd djc. Le
di éuvlu fl fjqzwvqhé, bjd e'xi vmdqzdyvlu fdjedtdiu ev mxliud od
fdf fvkxuf, vydz ed kxju od fdf odjc kqvf, ézvquéf oqxlu. Z'éuvlu
Edfulkxjoxlf, ed sxffxrdjq, bjl zwvqqlvlu ovif ev tjeulujod edf
zwvlfdf od e'éhelfd. Medli o'ltvhlivulxi mxjq uxju zd bjl
zxizdqivlu fdf liuéqêuf, le vyvlu oézxjydqu zd txrdi od ulqdq
mvqul odf zxtlzdf; du fxi loéd ejl qéjfflffvlu, zvq le id fvyvlu
mejf vjbjde, diudioqd. Di dssdu, edf yleevhdxlf, bjl vyvldiu
zwvjo, fd olfmjuvldiu zdf flèhdf oxiu ev mvleed fdiuvlu e'dizdif,
du f'vmmjrvldiu zxiuqd edjqf hqxf oxffldqf fvelf mvq ev zlqd odf
zldqhdf, vydz jid zdquvlid yéiéqvulxi.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr qdmqlu ed kqvf od Qxoxemwd; le zxiulijv zxttd fd
mvqeviu à ejl-têtd:

-- Xjl! uviu od zwxfdf t'xiu tvibjé! uxjaxjqf fdje! Vw! fl a'vyvlf
dj ji kju ovif ev yld, fl a'djffd qdizxiuqé jid vssdzulxi, fl
a'vyvlf uqxjyé bjdebj'ji... Xw! zxttd a'vjqvlf oémdifé uxjud
e'éidqhld oxiu ad fjlf zvmvked, a'vjqvlf fjqtxiué uxju, kqlfé
uxju!

-- Le td fdtked mxjquviu, olu Dttv, bjd yxjf i'êudf hjèqd à
mevlioqd.

-- Vw! yxjf uqxjydg? slu Qxoxemwd.

-- Zvq disli..., qdmqlu-deed, yxjf êudf elkqd.

Deed wéfluv:

-- Qlzwd.

-- Id yxjf txbjdg mvf od txl, qémxiolu-le.

Du deed ajqvlu bj'deed id fd txbjvlu mvf, bjvio ji zxjm od zvixi
qdudiulu; vjffluôu, xi fd mxjffv, mêed-têed, ydqf ed yleevhd.

Z'éuvlu jid svjffd vedqud. T. ed mqésdu i'vqqlyvlu mvf; du edf
tdtkqdf oj ajqr fd uqxjyvldiu sxqu dtkvqqvfféf, id fvzwviu f'le
sveevlu zxttdizdq ev févizd xj kldi vuudioqd dizxqd.

Disli, vj sxio od ev Mevzd, mvqju ji hqvio eviovj od exjvhd,
uqvîié mvq odjc zwdyvjc tvlhqdf, bjd sxjduuvlu à uxjq od kqvf ji
zxzwdq di zwvmdvj keviz. Klidu i'dju bjd ed udtmf od zqldq: «Vjc
vqtdf!» du ed zxexide od e'ltludq. Xi zxjqju ydqf edf svlfzdvjc.
Xi fd mqézlmluv. Bjdebjdf-jif têtd xjkelèqdiu edjq zxe. Tvlf
e'ébjlmvhd mqésdzuxqve fdtkev odylidq zdu dtkvqqvf, du edf odjc
qxffdf vzzxjmeédf, fd ovioliviu fjq edjq zwvîiduud, vqqlyèqdiu vj
mdulu uqxu odyviu ed méqlfured od ev tvlqld, ajfud vj txtdiu xù ev
hvqod ivulxived du edf mxtmldqf f'r oémexrvldiu, uvtkxjq kvuuviu,
du tvqbjviu ed mvf.

-- Kvevizdg! zqlv Klidu.

-- Wveud! zqlv ed zxexide. Mvq sled à hvjzwd!

Du, vmqèf, ji mxqu o'vqtdf xù ed zelbjdulf odf zvmjzlidf, fd
oéqxjeviu, fxiiv zxttd ji zwvjoqxi od zjlyqd bjl oéhqlihxed edf
dfzveldqf, uxjf edf sjflef qduxtkèqdiu.

Vexqf xi ylu odfzdioqd oj zvqqxffd ji txifldjq yêuj o'ji wvklu
zxjqu à kqxodqld o'vqhdiu, zwvjyd fjq ed sqxiu, mxquviu uxjmdu à
e'xzzlmju, vrviu ed udliu kevsvqo du e'vmmvqdizd odf mejf
kéilhidf. Fdf odjc rdjc, sxqu hqxf du zxjydquf od mvjmlèqdf
émvlffdf, fd sdqtvldiu à odtl mxjq zxifloéqdq ev tjeulujod, di
têtd udtmf bj'le edyvlu fxi idg mxliuj du svlfvlu fxjqlqd fv
kxjzwd qdiuqéd. Le qdzxiiju ed tvlqd à fxi ézwvqmd, du ejl dcmxfv
bjd T. ed mqésdu i'vyvlu mj ydilq. Le éuvlu, ejl, ji zxifdleedq od
mqésdzujqd; mjlf le vaxjuv bjdebjdf dczjfdf. Ujyvzwd r qémxiolu
mvq odf zlyleluéf, e'vjuqd f'vyxjv zxisjf; du lef qdfuvldiu vlifl,
svzd à svzd, du edjqf sqxiuf fd uxjzwviu mqdfbjd, vydz edf tdtkqdf
oj ajqr uxju vediuxjq, ed zxifdle tjilzlmve, edf ixuvkedf, ev
hvqod ivulxived du ev sxjed. T. ed zxifdleedq, vmmjrviu zxiuqd fv
mxluqlid fxi mdulu uqlzxqid ixlq, qéluéqvlu fdf fvejuvulxif,
uviolf bjd Ujyvzwd, zxjqké zxttd ji vqz, fxjqlvlu vjffl, kéhvrvlu,
zwdqzwvlu fdf mwqvfdf, mqxudfuvlu od fxi oéyxjdtdiu à ev
txivqzwld, du od e'wxiidjq bjd e'xi svlfvlu à Rxiyleed.

Wlmmxerud, ed hvqçxi od e'vjkdqhd, yliu mqdioqd mvq ev kqlod edf
zwdyvjc oj zxzwdq, du uxju di kxluviu od fxi mldo kxu, le edf
zxiojlflu fxjf ed mxqzwd oj Elxi o'xq, xù kdvjzxjm od mvrfvif
f'vtvffèqdiu à qdhvqodq ev yxlujqd. Ed uvtkxjq kvuulu, e'xkjfldq
uxiiv, du edf tdffldjqf à ev sled txiuèqdiu f'vffdxlq fjq
e'dfuqvod, ovif edf svjudjlef di juqdzwu qxjhd bj'vyvlu mqêuéf
tvovtd Ujyvzwd.

Uxjf zdf hdif-eà fd qdffdtkevldiu. Edjqf txeedf slhjqdf kexiodf,
ji mdj wâeédf mvq ed fxedle, vyvldiu ev zxjedjq oj zloqd oxjc, du
edjqf svyxqlf kxjssviuf f'ézwvmmvldiu od hqviof zxef qxlodf, bjd
tvliudivldiu odf zqvyvudf kevizwdf à qxfduud kldi éuveéd. Uxjf edf
hleduf éuvldiu od ydexjqf, à zwâed; uxjudf edf txiuqdf mxquvldiu
vj kxju o'ji exih qjkvi bjdebjd zvzwdu xyved di zxqivelid; du e'xi
vmmjrvlu fdf odjc tvlif fjq fdf odjc zjlffdf, di ézvquviu vydz
fxli ev sxjqzwd oj mviuvexi, oxiu ed oqvm ixi oézvul qdejlfvlu
mejf kqleevttdiu bjd ed zjlq odf sxqudf kxuudf.

Edf ovtdf od ev fxzléué fd udivldiu odqqlèqd, fxjf ed ydfulkjed,
diuqd edf zxexiidf, uviolf bjd ed zxttji od ev sxjed éuvlu di
svzd, odkxju, xj kldi vfflf fjq odf zwvlfdf. Di dssdu,
Edfulkxjoxlf vyvlu vmmxqué eà uxjudf zdeedf bj'le vyvlu oétéivhédf
od ev mqvlqld, du têtd le zxjqvlu à zwvbjd tlijud di zwdqzwdq
o'vjuqdf ovif e'éhelfd, du zvjfvlu ji ude dizxtkqdtdiu mvq fxi
zxttdqzd, bjd e'xi vyvlu hqvio-mdlid à mvqydilq ajfbj'vj mdulu
dfzveldq od e'dfuqvod.

-- Txl, ad uqxjyd, olu T. Ewdjqdjc (f'voqdffviu vj mwvqtvzldi, bjl
mvffvlu mxjq hvhidq fv mevzd), bjd e'xi vjqvlu oû meviudq eà odjc
tâuf yéiluldif: vydz bjdebjd zwxfd o'ji mdj féyèqd du od qlzwd
zxttd ixjydvjuéf, z'dûu éué o'ji sxqu axel zxjm o'xdle.

-- Zdqudf, qémxiolu Wxtvlf. Tvlf, bjd yxjedg-yxjf! z'dfu ed tvlqd
bjl v uxju mqlf fxjf fxi kxiidu. Le i'v mvf hqvio hxûu, zd mvjyqd
Ujyvzwd, du le dfu têtd zxtmeèudtdiu oéijé od zd bjl f'vmmdeed ed
héild odf vquf.

Zdmdioviu Qxoxemwd, vydz tvovtd Kxyvqr, éuvlu txiué vj mqdtldq
éuvhd od ev tvlqld, ovif ev fveed odf oéelkéqvulxif, du, zxttd
deed éuvlu ylod, le vyvlu oézevqé bjd e'xi r fdqvlu kldi mxjq
axjlq oj fmdzuvzed mejf à fxi vlfd. Le mqlu uqxlf uvkxjqduf vjuxjq
od ev uvked xyved, fxjf ed kjfud oj txivqbjd, du, edf vrviu
vmmqxzwéf od e'jid odf sdiêuqdf, lef f'vfflqdiu e'ji mqèf od
e'vjuqd.

Le r dju jid vhluvulxi fjq e'dfuqvod, od exihf zwjzwxudtdiuf, odf
mxjqmvqedqf. Disli, T. ed Zxifdleedq fd edyv. Xi fvyvlu tvliudiviu
bj'le f'vmmdevlu Eldjyvli, du e'xi fd qéméuvlu fxi ixt od e'ji à
e'vjuqd, ovif ev sxjed. Bjvio le dju oxiz zxeevulxiié bjdebjdf
sdjleedf du vmmelbjé odffjf fxi xdle mxjq r tldjc yxlq, le
zxttdiçv:

«Tdffldjqf,

Bj'le td fxlu mdqtlf o'vkxqo (vyviu od yxjf diuqdudilq od e'xkadu
od zduud qéjilxi o'vjaxjqo'wjl, du zd fdiultdiu, a'di fjlf fûq,
fdqv mvquvhé mvq yxjf uxjf), bj'le td fxlu mdqtlf, olf-ad od
qdioqd ajfulzd à e'votlilfuqvulxi fjméqldjqd, vj hxjydqidtdiu, vj
txivqbjd, tdffldjqf, à ixuqd fxjydqvli, à zd qxl kldi-vlté à bjl
vjzjid kqvizwd od ev mqxfméqlué mjkelbjd xj mvqulzjelèqd i'dfu
liolsséqdiud, du bjl olqlhd à ev sxlf o'jid tvli fl sdqtd du fl
fvhd ed zwvq od e'Éuvu mvqtl edf méqlef lizdffviuf o'jid tdq
xqvhdjfd, fvzwviu o'vleedjqf svlqd qdfmdzudq ev mvlc zxttd ev
hjdqqd, e'liojfuqld, ed zxttdqzd, e'vhqlzjeujqd du edf kdvjc-
vquf.»

-- Ad odyqvlf, olu Qxoxemwd, td qdzjedq ji mdj.

-- Mxjqbjxl? olu Dttv.

Tvlf, à zd txtdiu, ev yxlc oj Zxifdleedq f'éedyv o'ji uxi
dcuqvxqolivlqd. Le oézevtvlu:

«Ed udtmf i'dfu mejf, tdffldjqf, xù ev olfzxqod zlyled
difviheviuvlu ixf mevzdf mjkelbjdf, xù ed mqxmqléuvlqd, ed
iéhxzlviu, e'xjyqldq ejl-têtd, di f'dioxqtviu ed fxlq o'ji fxttdle
mvlflked, uqdtkevldiu od fd yxlq qéydleeéf uxju à zxjm vj kqjlu
odf uxzflif lizdiolvlqdf, xù edf tvcltdf edf mejf fjkydqflydf
fvmvldiu vjovzldjfdtdiu edf kvfdf...»

-- Z'dfu bj'xi mxjqqvlu, qdmqlu Qxoxemwd, t'vmdqzdyxlq o'di kvf;
mjlf a'di vjqvlf mxjq bjligd axjqf à oxiidq odf dczjfdf, du, vydz
tv tvjyvlfd qémjuvulxi...

-- Xw! yxjf yxjf zvextildg, olu Dttv.

-- Ixi, ixi, deed dfu dcézqvked, ad yxjf ajqd.

«Tvlf tdffldjqf, mxjqfjlyvlu ed Zxifdleedq, bjd fl, ézvquviu od
txi fxjydilq zdf fxtkqdf uvkedvjc, ad qdmxqud tdf rdjc fjq ev
flujvulxi vzujdeed od ixuqd kdeed mvuqld: bj'r yxlf-ad? Mvquxju
sedjqlffdiu ed zxttdqzd du edf vquf; mvquxju odf yxldf ixjydeedf
od zxttjilzvulxi, zxttd vjuviu o'vquèqdf ixjydeedf ovif ed zxqmf
od e'Éuvu, r éuvkelffdiu odf qvmmxquf ixjydvjc; ixf hqviof zdiuqdf
tvijsvzujqldqf xiu qdmqlf edjq vzulylué; ev qdelhlxi, mejf
vssdqtld, fxjqlu à uxjf edf zxdjqf; ixf mxquf fxiu medlif, ev
zxislvizd qdivîu, du disli ev Sqvizd qdfmlqd!...»

-- Oj qdfud, vaxjuv Qxoxemwd, mdju-êuqd, vj mxliu od yjd oj txiod,
v-u-xi qvlfxi?

-- Zxttdiu zdev? slu-deed.

-- Dw bjxl! olu-le, id fvydg-yxjf mvf bj'le r v odf âtdf fvif
zdffd uxjqtdiuédf? Le edjq svju uxjq à uxjq ed qêyd du e'vzulxi,
edf mvfflxif edf mejf mjqdf, edf axjlffvizdf edf mejf sjqldjfdf,
du e'xi fd aduud vlifl ovif uxjudf fxqudf od sviuvlfldf, od
sxeldf.

Vexqf deed ed qdhvqov zxttd xi zxiudtmed ji yxrvhdjq bjl v mvffé
mvq odf mvrf dcuqvxqolivlqdf, du deed qdmqlu:

-- Ixjf i'vyxif mvf têtd zduud olfuqvzulxi, ixjf vjuqdf mvjyqdf
sdttdf!

-- Uqlfud olfuqvzulxi zvq xi i'r uqxjyd mvf ed kxiwdjq.

-- Tvlf ed uqxjyd-u-xi avtvlf? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Xjl, le fd qdizxiuqd ji axjq, qémxiolu-le.

«Du z'dfu eà zd bjd yxjf vydg zxtmqlf, olfvlu ed Zxifdleedq. Yxjf,
vhqlzjeudjqf du xjyqldqf odf zvtmvhidf; yxjf, mlxiildqf mvzlslbjdf
o'jid xdjyqd uxjud od zlylelfvulxi! yxjf, wxttdf od mqxhqèf du od
txqvelué! yxjf vydg zxtmqlf, olf-ad, bjd edf xqvhdf mxelulbjdf
fxiu dizxqd mejf qdoxjuvkedf yqvltdiu bjd edf oéfxqoqdf od
e'vutxfmwèqd...»

-- Le fd qdizxiuqd ji axjq, qéméuv Qxoxemwd, ji axjq, uxju à zxjm,
du bjvio xi di oéfdfméqvlu. Vexqf odf wxqlgxif f'diuqxjyqdiu,
z'dfu zxttd jid yxlc bjl zqld: «Ed yxleà!» Yxjf fdiudg ed kdfxli
od svlqd à zduud mdqfxiid ev zxislodizd od yxuqd yld; od ejl
oxiidq uxju, od ejl fvzqlsldq uxju! Xi id f'dcmelbjd mvf, xi fd
odylid. Xi f'dfu diuqdyj ovif fdf qêydf. (Du le ev qdhvqovlu.)
Disli, le dfu eà, zd uqéfxq bjd e'xi v uviu zwdqzwé, eà, odyviu
yxjf; le kqleed, le éulizdeed. Zdmdioviu xi di oxjud dizxqd, xi
i'xfd r zqxlqd; xi di qdfud ékexjl, zxttd fl e'xi fxquvlu odf
uéièkqdf à ev ejtlèqd.

Du, di vzwdyviu zdf txuf; Qxoxemwd vaxjuv ev mviuxtltd à fv
mwqvfd. Le fd mvffv ev tvli fjq ed ylfvhd, ude bj'ji wxttd mqlf
o'éuxjqolffdtdiu; mjlf le ev evlffv qduxtkdq fjq zdeed o'Dttv.
Deed qdulqv ev fldiid. Tvlf ed Zxifdleedq elfvlu uxjaxjqf:

«Du bjl f'di éuxiidqvlu, tdffldjqf? Zdejl-eà fdje bjl fdqvlu vffdg
vydjhed, vffdg mexihé (ad id zqvlif mvf od ed olqd), vffdg mexihé
ovif edf mqéajhéf o'ji vjuqd âhd mxjq tézxiivîuqd dizxqd e'dfmqlu
odf mxmjevulxif vhqlzxedf. Xù uqxjydq, di dssdu, mejf od
mvuqlxulftd bjd ovif edf zvtmvhidf, mejf od oéyxjdtdiu à ev zvjfd
mjkelbjd, mejf o'liudeelhdizd di ji txu? Du ad i'diudiof mvf,
tdffldjqf, zduud liudeelhdizd fjmdqslzldeed, yvli xqidtdiu odf
dfmqluf xlflsf, tvlf mejf od zduud liudeelhdizd mqxsxiod du
txoéqéd, bjl f'vmmelbjd mvq-odffjf uxjud zwxfd à mxjqfjlyqd odf
kjuf juledf, zxiuqlkjviu vlifl vj kldi od zwvzji, à e'vtéelxqvulxi
zxttjid du vj fxjuldi odf Éuvuf, sqjlu oj qdfmdzu odf exlf du od
ev mqvulbjd odf odyxlqf...»

-- Vw! dizxqd, olu Qxoxemwd. Uxjaxjqf edf odyxlqf, ad fjlf vffxtté
od zdf txuf-eà. Lef fxiu ji uvf od yldleedf hvivzwdf di hledu od
sevideed, du od klhxudf à zwvjssdqduud du à zwvmdedu, bjl
zxiulijdeedtdiu ixjf zwviudiu vjc xqdleedf: «Ed odyxlq! ed
odyxlq!» Dw! mvqkedj! ed odyxlq, z'dfu od fdiulq zd bjl dfu hqvio,
od zwéqlq zd bjl dfu kdvj, du ixi mvf o'vzzdmudq uxjudf edf
zxiydiulxif od ev fxzléué, vydz edf lhixtlildf bj'deed ixjf
ltmxfd.

-- Zdmdioviu..., zdmdioviu..., xkadzuvlu tvovtd Kxyvqr.

-- Dw ixi! mxjqbjxl oézevtdq zxiuqd edf mvfflxif? Id fxiu-deedf
mvf ev fdjed kdeed zwxfd bj'le r vlu fjq ev udqqd, ev fxjqzd od
e'wéqxïftd, od e'diuwxjflvftd, od ev mxéfld, od ev tjflbjd, odf
vquf, od uxju disli?

-- Tvlf le svju kldi, olu Dttv, fjlyqd ji mdj e'xmlilxi oj txiod
du xkélq à fv txqved.

-- Vw! z'dfu bj'le r di v odjc, qémelbjv-u-le. Ev mdulud, ev
zxiydijd, zdeed odf wxttdf, zdeed bjl yvqld fvif zdffd du bjl
kqvleed fl sxqu, f'vhlud di kvf, udqqd à udqqd, zxttd zd
qvffdtkedtdiu o'ltkézledf bjd yxjf yxrdg. Tvlf e'vjuqd,
e'éudqideed, deed dfu uxju vjuxjq du vj-odffjf, zxttd ed mvrfvhd
bjl ixjf diylqxiid du ed zlde kedj bjl ixjf ézevlqd.

T. Eldjyvli ydivlu od f'dffjrdq ev kxjzwd vydz fxi txjzwxlq od
mxzwd. Le qdmqlu:

«Du bj'vjqvlf-ad à svlqd, tdffldjqf, od yxjf oétxiuqdq lzl
e'julelué od e'vhqlzjeujqd? Bjl oxiz mxjqyxlu à ixf kdfxlif? bjl
oxiz sxjqilu à ixuqd fjkflfuvizd? I'dfu-zd mvf e'vhqlzjeudjq?
E'vhqlzjeudjq, tdffldjqf, bjl, difdtdiçviu o'jid tvli evkxqldjfd
edf fleexif sézxiof odf zvtmvhidf, svlu ivîuqd ed keé, edbjde
kqxré dfu tlf di mxjoqd vj txrdi o'lihéildjc vmmvqdlef, di fxqu
fxjf ed ixt od svqlid, du, od eà, uqvifmxqué ovif edf zluéf, dfu
kldiuôu qdioj zwdg ed kxjevihdq, bjl di zxisdzulxiid ji veltdiu
mxjq ed mvjyqd zxttd mxjq ed qlzwd. I'dfu-zd mvf e'vhqlzjeudjq
dizxqd bjl dihqvlffd, mxjq ixf yêudtdiuf, fdf vkxioviuf uqxjmdvjc
ovif edf mâujqvhdf? Zvq zxttdiu ixjf yêulqlxif-ixjf, zvq zxttdiu
ixjf ixjqqlqlxif-ixjf fvif e'vhqlzjeudjq? Du têtd, tdffldjqf, dfu-
le kdfxli o'veedq fl exli zwdqzwdq odf dcdtmedf? Bjl i'v fxjydiu
qéseézwl à uxjud e'ltmxquvizd bjd e'xi qdulqd od zd txodfud
viltve, xqidtdiu od ixf kvffdf-zxjqf, bjl sxjqilu à ev sxlf ji
xqdleedq txdeedjc mxjq ixf zxjzwdf, fv zwvlq fjzzjediud mxjq ixf
uvkedf, du odf xdjsf? Tvlf ad i'di slilqvlf mvf, f'le sveevlu
éijtéqdq edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf edf olsséqdiuf mqxojluf bjd ev
udqqd kldi zjeulyéd, udeed bj'jid tèqd héiéqdjfd, mqxolhjd à fdf
disviuf. Lzl, z'dfu ev ylhid; vleedjqf, zd fxiu edf mxttldqf à
zloqd; eà, ed zxegv; mejf exli, edf sqxtvhdf; du ed eli;
tdffldjqf, i'xjkelxif mvf ed eli! bjl v mqlf ovif zdf odqilèqdf
viiédf ji vzzqxlffdtdiu zxifloéqvked du fjq edbjde a'vmmdeedqvl
mejf mvqulzjelèqdtdiu yxuqd vuudiulxi.»

Le i'vyvlu mvf kdfxli od e'vmmdedq: zvq uxjudf edf kxjzwdf od ev
tjeulujod fd udivldiu xjydqudf, zxttd mxjq kxlqd fdf mvqxedf.
Ujyvzwd, à zôué od ejl, e'ézxjuvlu di ézvqbjleeviu edf rdjc;
T. Odqxgdqvrf, od udtmf à vjuqd, sdqtvlu oxjzdtdiu edf mvjmlèqdf;
du, mejf exli, ed mwvqtvzldi, vydz fxi slef Ivmxeéxi diuqd fdf
avtkdf, kxtkvlu fv tvli zxiuqd fxi xqdleed mxjq id mvf mdqoqd jid
fdjed freevkd. Edf vjuqdf tdtkqdf oj ajqr kveviçvldiu ediudtdiu
edjq tdiuxi ovif edjq hledu, di flhid o'vmmqxkvulxi. Edf mxtmldqf,
vj kvf od e'dfuqvod, fd qdmxfvldiu fjq edjqf kvïxiiduudf; du
Klidu, lttxkled, qdfuvlu ed zxjod di odwxqf, vydz ev mxliud oj
fvkqd di e'vlq. Le diudiovlu mdju-êuqd, tvlf le id odyvlu qldi
vmdqzdyxlq, à zvjfd od ev ylflèqd od fxi zvfbjd bjl ejl odfzdiovlu
fjq ed idg. Fxi eldjudiviu, ed slef zvodu oj fldjq Ujyvzwd, vyvlu
dizxqd dcvhéqé ed fldi; zvq le di mxquvlu ji éixqtd du bjl ejl
yvzleevlu fjq ev uêud, di evlffviu oémvffdq ji kxju od fxi sxjevqo
o'lioldiid. Le fxjqlvlu eà-odffxjf vydz jid oxjzdjq uxju
disviulid, du fv mdulud slhjqd mâed, xù odf hxjuudf qjlffdevldiu,
vyvlu jid dcmqdfflxi od axjlffvizd, o'vzzvkedtdiu du od fxttdle

Ev mevzd ajfbj'vjc tvlfxif éuvlu zxtked od txiod. Xi yxrvlu odf
hdif vzzxjoéf à uxjudf edf sdiêuqdf, o'vjuqdf odkxju fjq uxjudf
edf mxqudf, du Ajfuli, odyviu ev odyviujqd od ev mwvqtvzld,
mvqvlffvlu uxju slcé ovif ev zxiudtmevulxi od zd bj'le qdhvqovlu.
Tvehqé ed fledizd, ev yxlc od T. Eldjyvli fd mdqovlu ovif e'vlq.
Deed yxjf vqqlyvlu mvq evtkdvjc od mwqvfdf, bj'liudqqxtmvlu, çà du
eà ed kqjlu odf zwvlfdf ovif ev sxjed; mjlf xi diudiovlu, uxju à
zxjm, mvqulq odqqlèqd fxl ji exih tjhlffdtdiu od kxdjs, xj kldi
edf kêedtdiuf odf vhidvjc bjl fd qémxiovldiu vj zxli odf qjdf. Di
dssdu, edf yvzwdqf du edf kdqhdqf vyvldiu mxjffé edjqf kêudf
ajfbjd-eà, du deedf kdjhevldiu od udtmf à vjuqd, uxju di vqqvzwviu
vydz edjq evihjd bjdebjd kqlkd od sdjleevhd bjl edjq mdiovlu fjq
ed tjfdvj.

Qxoxemwd f'éuvlu qvmmqxzwé o'Dttv, du le olfvlu o'jid yxlc kvffd,
di mvqeviu ylud:

-- Dfu-zd bjd zduud zxiajqvulxi oj txiod id yxjf qéyxeud mvf? Dfu-
le ji fdje fdiultdiu bj'le id zxiovtid? Edf lifulizuf edf mejf
ixkedf, edf frtmvuwldf edf mejf mjqdf fxiu mdqfézjuéf, zvextiléf,
du, f'le fd qdizxiuqd disli odjc mvjyqdf âtdf, uxju dfu xqhvilfé
mxjq bj'deedf id mjlffdiu fd axlioqd. Deedf dffvrdqxiu zdmdioviu,
deedf kvuuqxiu odf vledf, deedf f'vmmdeedqxiu. Xw! i'ltmxqud, uôu
xj uvqo, ovif flc txlf, olc vif, deedf fd qéjilqxiu, f'vltdqxiu,
mvqzd bjd ev svuvelué e'dclhd du bj'deedf fxiu iédf e'jid mxjq
e'vjuqd.

Le fd udivlu edf kqvf zqxlféf fjq fdf hdixjc, du, vlifl edyviu ev
slhjqd ydqf Dttv, le ev qdhvqovlu od mqèf, slcdtdiu. Deed
olfulihjvlu ovif fdf rdjc odf mduluf qvrxif o'xq f'lqqvolviu uxju
vjuxjq od fdf mjmleedf ixlqdf, du têtd deed fdiuvlu ed mvqsjt od
ev mxttvod bjl ejfuqvlu fv zwdydejqd. Vexqf jid txeedffd ev
fvlflu, deed fd qvmmdev zd ylzxtud bjl e'vyvlu svlu yvefdq à ev
Yvjkrdffvqo, du oxiu ev kvqkd dcwvevlu, zxttd zdf zwdydjc-eà,
zduud xodjq od yvileed du od zluqxi; du, tvzwlivedtdiu, deed
diuqdsdqtv edf mvjmlèqdf mxjq ev tldjc qdfmlqdq: Tvlf, ovif zd
hdfud bj'deed slu di fd zvtkqviu fjq fv zwvlfd, deed vmdqçju vj
exli, uxju vj sxio od e'wxqlgxi, ev yldleed olelhdizd
e'Wlqxiodeed, bjl odfzdiovlu ediudtdiu ev zôud odf Edjc, di
uqvîiviu vmqèf fxl ji exih mvivzwd od mxjfflèqd. Z'éuvlu ovif
zduud yxlujqd avjid bjd Eéxi, fl fxjydiu, éuvlu qdydij ydqf deed;
du mvq zduud qxjud eà-kvf bj'le éuvlu mvqul mxjq uxjaxjqf! Deed
zqju ed yxlq di svzd, à fv sdiêuqd; mjlf uxju fd zxisxiolu, odf
ijvhdf mvffèqdiu; le ejl fdtkev bj'deed uxjqivlu dizxqd ovif ev
yvefd, fxjf ed sdj odf ejfuqdf, vj kqvf oj ylzxtud, du bjd Eéxi
i'éuvlu mvf exli, bjl veevlu ydilq ... du zdmdioviu deed fdiuvlu
uxjaxjqf ev uêud od Qxoxemwd à zôué o'deed. Ev oxjzdjq od zduud
fdifvulxi méiéuqvlu vlifl fdf oéflqf o'vjuqdsxlf, du zxttd odf
hqvlif od fvked fxjf ji zxjm od ydiu, lef uxjqkleexiivldiu ovif ev
kxjsséd fjkuled oj mvqsjt bjl fd qémviovlu fjq fxi âtd. Deed
xjyqlu edf ivqlidf à mejfldjqf qdmqlfdf, sxqudtdiu, mxjq vfmlqdq
ev sqvîzwdjq odf eldqqdf vjuxjq odf zwvmludvjc. Deed qdulqv fdf
hviuf, deed f'dffjrv edf tvlif; mjlf, vydz fxi txjzwxlq, deed
f'éydiuvlu ev slhjqd, uviolf bj'à uqvydqf ed kvuudtdiu od fdf
udtmdf deed diudiovlu ev qjtdjq od ev sxjed du ev yxlc oj
Zxifdleedq bjl mfvetxolvlu fdf mwqvfdf.

Le olfvlu:

«Zxiulijdg! mdqféyéqdg! i'ézxjudg il edf fjhhdfulxif od ev
qxjulid, il edf zxifdlef uqxm wâulsf o'ji dtmlqlftd uétéqvlqd!
Vmmelbjdg-yxjf fjquxju à e'vtéelxqvulxi oj fxe, vjc kxif dihqvlf,
vj oéydexmmdtdiu odf qvzdf zwdyvelidf, kxylidf, xylidf du
mxqzlidf! Bjd zdf zxtlzdf fxldiu mxjq yxjf zxttd odf vqèidf
mvzlslbjdf xù ed yvlibjdjq, di di fxquviu, udioqv ev tvli vj
yvlizj du sqvudqilfdqv vydz ejl, ovif e'dfmxlq o'ji fjzzèf
tdleedjq! Du yxjf, yéiéqvkedf fdqyludjqf! wjtkedf oxtdfulbjdf,
oxiu vjzji hxjydqidtdiu ajfbj'à zd axjq i'vyvlu mqlf di
zxifloéqvulxi edf méilkedf evkdjqf, ydidg qdzdyxlq ev qézxtmdifd
od yxf ydqujf fledizldjfdf, du fxrdg zxiyvlizjf bjd e'éuvu,
oéfxqtvlf, v edf rdjc slcéf fjq yxjf, bj'le yxjf dizxjqvhd, bj'le
yxjf mqxuèhd, bj'le sdqv oqxlu à yxf ajfudf qézevtvulxif du
veeéhdqv, vjuviu bj'le dfu di ejl, ed svqodvj od yxf méilkedf
fvzqlslzdf!».

T. Eldjyvli fd qvfflu vexqf; T. Odqxgdqvrf fd edyv, zxttdiçviu ji
vjuqd olfzxjqf. Ed fldi mdju-êuqd, id sju mxliu vjffl sedjql bjd
zdejl oj Zxifdleedq; tvlf le fd qdzxttviovlu mvq ji zvqvzuèqd od
fured mejf mxfluls, z'dfu-à-olqd mvq odf zxiivlffvizdf mejf
fmézlvedf du odf zxifloéqvulxif mejf qdedyédf. Vlifl, e'éexhd oj
hxjydqidtdiu r udivlu txlif od mevzd; ev qdelhlxi du e'vhqlzjeujqd
di xzzjmvldiu ovyviuvhd. Xi r yxrvlu ed qvmmxqu od e'jid du od
e'vjuqd, du zxttdiu deedf vyvldiu zxizxjqj uxjaxjqf à ev
zlylelfvulxi. Qxoxemwd, vydz tvovtd Kxyvqr, zvjfvlu qêydf,
mqdffdiultdiuf, tvhiéulftd. Qdtxiuviu vj kdqzdvj odf fxzléuéf,
e'xqvudjq yxjf oémdlhivlu zdf udtmf svqxjzwdf xù edf wxttdf
ylyvldiu od heviof, vj sxio odf kxlf. Mjlf lef vyvldiu bjluué ev
oémxjleed odf kêudf; dioxffé ed oqvm, zqdjfé odf fleexif, meviué
ev ylhid. Éuvlu-zd ji kldi, du i'r vyvlu-le mvf ovif zduud
oézxjydqud mejf o'lizxiyéildiuf bjd o'vyviuvhdf? T. Odqxgdqvrf fd
mxfvlu zd mqxkeètd. Oj tvhiéulftd, mdj à mdj, Qxoxemwd di éuvlu
ydij vjc vssliluéf, du, uviolf bjd T. ed mqéflodiu zluvlu
Zlizliivujf à fv zwvqqjd, Olxzeéuldi meviuviu fdf zwxjc, du edf
dtmdqdjqf od ev Zwlid livjhjqviu e'viiéd mvq odf fdtvleedf, ed
adjid wxttd dcmelbjvlu à ev adjid sdttd bjd zdf vuuqvzulxif
lqqéflfulkedf ulqvldiu edjq zvjfd od bjdebjd dclfudizd viuéqldjqd.

-- Vlifl, ixjf, olfvlu-le, mxjqbjxl ixjf fxttdf-ixjf zxiijf? bjde
wvfvqo e'v yxjej? Z'dfu bj'à uqvydqf e'éexlhidtdiu, fvif oxjud,
zxttd odjc sedjydf bjl zxjediu mxjq fd qdaxlioqd, ixf mdiudf
mvqulzjelèqdf ixjf vyvldiu mxjfféf e'ji ydqf e'vjuqd.

Du le fvlflu fv tvli; deed id ev qdulqv mvf.

«Difdtked od kxiidf zjeujqdf!» zqlv ed mqéflodiu.

-- Uviuôu, mvq dcdtmed, bjvio ad fjlf ydij zwdg yxjf...

«À T. Klgdu, od Bjlizvtmxlc.»

-- Fvyvlf-ad bjd ad yxjf vzzxtmvhidqvlf?

«Fxlcviud du olc sqvizf!»

-- Zdiu sxlf têtd a'vl yxjej mvqulq, du ad yxjf vl fjlyld, ad fjlf
qdfué.

«Sjtldqf.»

-- Zxttd ad qdfudqvlf zd fxlq, odtvli, edf vjuqdf axjqf, uxjud tv
yld!

«À T. Zvqxi, o'Vqhjdle, jid téovleed o'xq!»

-- Zvq avtvlf ad i'vl uqxjyé ovif ev fxzléué od mdqfxiid ji zwvqtd
vjffl zxtmedu.

«À T. Kvli, od Hlyqr-Fvliu-Tvquli!»

-- Vjffl, txl, a'dtmxqudqvl yxuqd fxjydilq.

«Mxjq ji kéeldq téqlixf...»

-- Tvlf yxjf t'xjkeldqdg, a'vjqvl mvffé zxttd jid xtkqd.

«À T. Kdexu, od Ixuqd-Ovtd...»

-- Xw! ixi, i'dfu-zd mvf, ad fdqvl bjdebjd zwxfd ovif yxuqd
mdiféd, ovif yxuqd yld?

«Qvzd mxqzlid, mqlc dc vdbjx: à TT. Edwéqlffé du Zjeedtkxjqh;
fxlcviud sqvizf!»

Qxoxemwd ejl fdqqvlu ev tvli, du le ev fdiuvlu uxjud zwvjod du
sqétlffviud zxttd jid uxjqudqdeed zvmulyd bjl ydju qdmqdioqd fv
yxeéd; tvlf, fxlu bj'deed dffvrâu od ev oéhvhdq xj kldi bj'deed
qémxioîu à zduud mqdfflxi, deed slu ji txjydtdiu odf oxlhuf; le
f'ézqlv:

-- Xw! tdqzl! Yxjf id td qdmxjffdg mvf! Yxjf êudf kxiid! yxjf
zxtmqdidg bjd ad fjlf à yxjf! Evlffdg bjd ad yxjf yxld, bjd ad
yxjf zxiudtmed!

Ji zxjm od ydiu bjl vqqlyv mvq edf sdiêuqdf sqxiçv ed uvmlf od ev
uvked, du, fjq ev Mevzd, di kvf, uxjf edf hqviof kxiiduf odf
mvrfviidf fd fxjedyèqdiu, zxttd odf vledf od mvmleexif kevizf bjl
f'vhludiu.

«Dtmexl od uxjqudvjc od hqvlidf xeévhlidjfdf», zxiulijv ed
mqéflodiu.

Le fd wâuvlu:

«Dihqvlf sevtvio, -- zjeujqd oj eli, -- oqvlivhd, -- kvjc à exihf
udqtdf, -- fdqylzdf od oxtdfulbjdf.»

Qxoxemwd id mvqevlu mejf. Lef fd qdhvqovldiu. Ji oéflq fjmqêtd
svlfvlu sqlffxiidq edjqf eèyqdf fèzwdf; du txeedtdiu, fvif dssxqu,
edjqf oxlhuf fd zxisxiolqdiu.

«Zvuwdqlid-Ilzvlfd-Éelfvkduw Edqxjc, od Fvffduxu-ev-Hjdqqlèqd,
mxjq zlibjviud-bjvuqd vif od fdqylzd ovif ev têtd sdqtd, jid
téovleed o'vqhdiu -- oj mqlc od ylihu-zlib sqvizf!»

«Xù dfu-deed, Zvuwdqlid Edqxjc?» qéméuv ed Zxifdleedq.

Deed id fd mqéfdiuvlu mvf, du e'xi diudiovlu odf yxlc bjl
zwjzwxuvldiu:

-- Yvf-r!

-- Ixi.

-- À hvjzwd!

-- I'vld mvf mdjq!

-- Vw! bj'deed dfu kêud!

-- Disli r dfu-deed? f'ézqlv Ujyvzwd.

-- Xjl!... ev yxleà!

-- Bj'deed vmmqxzwd oxiz!

Vexqf xi ylu f'vyvizdq fjq e'dfuqvod jid mdulud yldleed sdttd od
tvliuldi zqvliuls, du bjl mvqvlffvlu fd qvuvulidq ovif fdf mvjyqdf
yêudtdiuf. Deed vyvlu vjc mldof od hqxffdf hvexzwdf od kxlf, du,
ed exih odf wvizwdf, ji hqvio uvkeldq kedj. Fxi ylfvhd tvlhqd,
diuxjqé o'ji kéhjli fvif kxqojqd, éuvlu mejf melffé od qlodf
bj'jid mxttd od qdliduud seéuqld, du odf tvizwdf od fv zvtlfxed
qxjhd oémvffvldiu odjc exihjdf tvlif, à vqulzjevulxif ixjdjfdf. Ev
mxjfflèqd odf hqvihdf, ev mxuvffd odf edfflydf du ed fjliu odf
evlidf edf vyvldiu fl kldi dizqxûuédf, éqvleeédf, ojqzldf,
bj'deedf fdtkevldiu fvedf bjxlbj'deedf sjffdiu qlizédf o'dvj
zevlqd; du, à sxqzd o'vyxlq fdqyl, deedf qdfuvldiu diuqxjydqudf,
zxttd mxjq mqéfdiudq o'deedf-têtdf e'wjtked uétxlhivhd od uviu od
fxjssqvizdf fjkldf. Bjdebjd zwxfd o'jid qlhlolué txivzved qdedyvlu
e'dcmqdfflxi od fv slhjqd. Qldi od uqlfud xj o'vuudioql
i'vtxeelffvlu zd qdhvqo mâed. Ovif ev sqébjdiuvulxi odf viltvjc,
deed vyvlu mqlf edjq tjulftd du edjq mevzlolué. Z'éuvlu ev
mqdtlèqd sxlf bj'deed fd yxrvlu vj tleldj o'jid zxtmvhild fl
ixtkqdjfd; du, liuéqldjqdtdiu dssvqxjzwéd mvq edf oqvmdvjc, mvq
edf uvtkxjqf, mvq edf tdffldjqf di wvklu ixlq du mvq ev zqxlc
o'wxiidjq oj Zxifdleedq, deed odtdjqvlu uxju lttxkled, id fvzwviu
f'le sveevlu f'vyvizdq xj f'disjlq, il mxjqbjxl ev sxjed ev
mxjffvlu du mxjqbjxl edf dcvtlivudjqf ejl fxjqlvldiu. Vlifl fd
udivlu, odyviu zdf kxjqhdxlf émvixjlf, zd odtl-flèzed od
fdqylujod.

-- Vmmqxzwdg, yéiéqvked Zvuwdqlid-Ilzvlfd-Éelfvkduw Edqxjc! olu
T. ed Zxifdleedq, bjl vyvlu mqlf odf tvlif oj mqéflodiu ev elfud
odf evjqévuf.

Du uxjq à uxjq dcvtliviu ev sdjleed od mvmldq, mjlf ev yldleed
sdttd, le qéméuvlu o'ji uxi mvudqide:

-- Vmmqxzwdg, vmmqxzwdg!

-- Êudf-yxjf fxjqod? olu Ujyvzwd, di kxiolffviu fjq fxi svjudjle.

Du le fd tlu eà ejl zqldq ovif e'xqdleed:

-- Zlibjviud-bjvuqd vif od fdqylzd! Jid téovleed o'vqhdiu! Ylihu-
zlib sqvizf! Z'dfu mxjq yxjf.

Mjlf, bjvio deed dju fv téovleed, deed ev zxifloéqv. Vexqf ji
fxjqlqd od kévulujod fd qémviolu fjq fv slhjqd, du xi e'diudiolu
bjl tvqtxuuvlu di f'di veeviu:

-- Ad ev oxiidqvl vj zjqé od zwdg ixjf, mxjq bj'le td olfd odf
tdffdf.

-- Bjde svivulftd! dczevtv ed mwvqtvzldi, di fd mdizwviu ydqf ed
ixuvlqd.

Ev févizd éuvlu slild; ev sxjed fd olfmdqfv; du, tvliudiviu bjd
edf olfzxjqf éuvldiu ejf, zwvzji qdmqdivlu fxi qvih du uxju
qdiuqvlu ovif ev zxjujtd: edf tvîuqdf qjoxrvldiu edf oxtdfulbjdf,
du zdjc-zl sqvmmvldiu edf viltvjc, uqlxtmwvudjqf lioxediuf bjl
f'di qduxjqivldiu à e'éuvked, jid zxjqxiid ydqud diuqd edf zxqidf.

Zdmdioviu edf hvqodf ivulxivjc éuvldiu txiuéf vj mqdtldq éuvhd od
ev tvlqld, vydz odf kqlxzwdf dtkqxzwédf à edjqf kvïxiiduudf, du ed
uvtkxjq oj kvuvleexi bjl mxquvlu ji mvildq od kxjudleedf. Tvovtd
Kxyvqr mqlu ed kqvf od Qxoxemwd; le ev qdzxiojlflu zwdg deed; lef
fd fémvqèqdiu odyviu fv mxqud; mjlf le fd mqxtdiv fdje ovif ev
mqvlqld, uxju di vuudioviu e'wdjqd oj kvibjdu.

Ed sdfuli sju exih, kqjrviu, tve fdqyl; e'xi éuvlu fl uvffé, bjd
e'xi vyvlu mdlid à qdtjdq edf zxjodf, du edf mevizwdf éuqxludf bjl
fdqyvldiu od kvizf svleelqdiu fd qxtmqd fxjf ed mxlof odf
zxiylydf. Lef tvihdvldiu vkxiovttdiu. Zwvzji f'di oxiivlu mxjq fv
bjxud-mvqu. Ev fjdjq zxjevlu fjq uxjf edf sqxiuf; du jid yvmdjq
kevizwâuqd, zxttd ev kjéd o'ji sedjyd mvq ji tvuli o'vjuxtid,
sexuuvlu vj-odffjf od ev uvked, diuqd edf bjlibjduf fjfmdiojf.
Qxoxemwd, ed oxf vmmjré zxiuqd ed zvelzxu od ev udiud, mdifvlu fl
sxqu à Dttv, bj'le i'diudiovlu qldi. Odqqlèqd ejl, fjq ed hvgxi,
odf oxtdfulbjdf dtmlevldiu odf vfflduudf fvedf; fdf yxlflif
mvqevldiu, le id edjq qémxiovlu mvf; xi ejl dtmelffvlu fxi ydqqd,
du ji fledizd f'éuvkelffvlu ovif fv mdiféd, tvehqé edf
vzzqxlffdtdiuf od ev qjtdjq. Le qêyvlu à zd bj'deed vyvlu olu du à
ev sxqtd od fdf eèyqdf; fv slhjqd, zxttd di ji tlqxlq tvhlbjd,
kqleevlu fjq ev mevbjd odf fwvpxf; edf melf od fv qxkd
odfzdiovldiu ed exih odf tjqf, du odf axjqiédf o'vtxjq fd
oéqxjevldiu à e'lislil ovif edf mdqfmdzulydf od e'vydilq.

Le ev qdylu ed fxlq, mdioviu ed sdj o'vqulslzd; tvlf deed éuvlu
vydz fxi tvql, tvovtd Wxtvlf du ed mwvqtvzldi, edbjde fd
uxjqtdiuvlu kdvjzxjm fjq ed ovihdq odf sjfédf mdqojdf; du, à
zwvbjd txtdiu, le bjluuvlu ev zxtmvhild mxjq veedq svlqd à Klidu
odf qdzxttviovulxif.

Edf mlèzdf mrqxudzwilbjdf diyxrédf à e'voqdffd oj fldjq Ujyvzwd
vyvldiu, mvq dczèf od mqézvjulxi, éué disdqtédf ovif fv zvyd;
vjffl ev mxjoqd wjtlod id f'disevttvlu hjèqd, du ed txqzdvj
mqlizlmve, bjl odyvlu slhjqdq ji oqvhxi fd txqoviu ev bjdjd, qvuv
zxtmeèudtdiu. Od udtmf à vjuqd, le mvquvlu jid mvjyqd zwviodeed
qxtvlid; vexqf ev sxjed kéviud mxjffvlu jid zevtdjq xù fd têevlu
ed zql odf sdttdf à bjl e'xi zwvuxjleevlu ev uvleed mdioviu
e'xkfzjqlué. Dttv, fledizldjfd, fd kexuulffvlu oxjzdtdiu zxiuqd
e'émvjed od Zwvqedf; mjlf, ed tdiuxi edyé, deed fjlyvlu ovif ed
zlde ixlq ed adu ejtlidjc odf sjfédf. Qxoxemwd ev zxiudtmevlu à ev
ejdjq odf evtmlxif bjl kqûevldiu.

Lef f'éudlhilqdiu mdj à mdj. Edf éuxledf f'veejtèqdiu. Bjdebjdf
hxjuudf od mejld yliqdiu à uxtkdq. Deed ixjv fxi slzwj fjq fv uêud
ijd.

À zd txtdiu, ed slvzqd oj Zxifdleedq fxqulu od e'vjkdqhd. Fxi
zxzwdq, bjl éuvlu lyqd, f'vffxjmlu uxju à zxjm; du e'xi vmdqzdyvlu
od exli, mvq-odffjf ev zvmxud, diuqd edf odjc eviudqidf, ev tvffd
od fxi zxqmf bjl fd kveviçvlu od oqxlud du od hvjzwd fdexi ed
uvihvhd odf fxjmdiudf.

-- Di yéqlué, olu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, xi odyqvlu kldi féylq zxiuqd
e'lyqdffd! Ad yxjoqvlf bjd e'xi lifzqlyîu, wdkoxtvovlqdtdiu, à ev
mxqud od ev tvlqld, fjq ji uvkedvj vo wxz, edf ixtf od uxjf zdjc
bjl, ojqviu ev fdtvlid, fd fdqvldiu liuxclbjéf vydz odf vezxxef.
O'vleedjqf, fxjf ed qvmmxqu od ev fuvulfulbjd, xi vjqvlu eà zxttd
odf viivedf mvudiudf bj'xi lqvlu vj kdfxli... Tvlf dczjfdg.

Du le zxjqju dizxqd ydqf ed zvmluvlid.

Zdejl-zl qdiuqvlu à fv tvlfxi. Le veevlu qdyxlq fxi uxjq.

-- Mdju-êuqd id sdqldg-yxjf mvf tve, ejl olu Wxtvlf, o'diyxrdq ji
od yxf wxttdf xj o'veedq yxjf-têtd...

--Evlffdg-txl oxiz uqvibjleed, qémxiolu ed mdqzdmudjq, mjlfbj'le
i'r v qldi!

-- Qvffjqdg-yxjf, olu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, bjvio le sju qdydij mqèf od
fdf vtlf. T. Klidu t'v zdqulslé bjd edf tdfjqdf éuvldiu mqlfdf.
Ijeed sevttèzwd id fdqv uxtkéd. Edf mxtmdf fxiu medlidf. Veexif
oxqtlq.

-- Tv sxl! a'di vl kdfxli, slu tvovtd Wxtvlf bjl kâleevlu
zxifloéqvkedtdiu; tvlf, i'ltmxqud, ixjf vyxif dj mxjq ixuqd sêud
jid kldi kdeed axjqiéd.

Qxoxemwd qéméuv o'jid yxlc kvffd du vydz ji qdhvqo udioqd:

-- Xw! xjl, kldi kdeed!

Du, f'éuviu fvejéf, xi fd uxjqiv ed oxf.

Odjc axjqf vmqèf, ovif ed Svive od Qxjdi le r vyvlu ji hqvio
vqulzed fjq edf zxtlzdf. Wxtvlf e'vyvlu zxtmxfé, od ydqyd, oèf ed
ediodtvli:

«Mxjqbjxl zdf sdfuxif, zdf sedjqf, zdf hjlqeviodf? Xù zxjqvlu
zduud sxjed zxttd edf sexuf o'jid tdq di sjqld, fxjf edf uxqqdiuf
o'ji fxedle uqxmlzve bjl qémviovlu fv zwvedjq fjq ixf hjéqduf?»

Difjlud, le mvqevlu od ev zxiolulxi odf mvrfvif. Zdqudf, ed
hxjydqidtdiu svlfvlu kdvjzxjm, tvlf, mvf vffdg! «Oj zxjqvhd! ejl
zqlvlu-le; tleed qésxqtdf fxiu liolfmdifvkedf, vzzxtmelffxif-edf.»
Mjlf, vkxqoviu e'diuqéd oj Zxifdleedq, le i'xjkelvlu mxliu «e'vlq
tvqulve od ixuqd tlelzd», il «ixf mejf fétleeviudf yleevhdxlfdf»,
il «edf yldleevqof à uêud zwvjyd, fxqud od mvuqlvqzwdf bjl éuvldiu
eà, du oxiu bjdebjdf-jif, oékqlf od ixf lttxqudeedf mwvevihdf,
fdiuvldiu dizxqd kvuuqd edjqf zxdjqf vj fxi tâed odf uvtkxjqf.» Le
fd zluvlu odf mqdtldqf mvqtl edf tdtkqdf oj ajqr, du têtd le
qvmmdevlu, ovif jid ixud, bjd T. Wxtvlf, mwvqtvzldi, vyvlu diyxré
ji tétxlqd fjq ed zloqd à ev Fxzléué o'vhqlzjeujqd. Bjvio le
vqqlyvlu à ev olfuqlkjulxi odf qézxtmdifdf, le oémdlhivlu ev axld
odf evjqévuf di uqvluf oluwrqvtklbjdf. Ed mèqd dtkqvffvlu fxi
slef, ed sqèqd ed sqèqd, e'émxjc e'émxjfd. Mejf o'ji txiuqvlu vydz
xqhjdle fxi wjtked téovleed, du fvif oxjud, qdydij zwdg ejl, mqèf
od fv kxiid téivhèqd, le e'vjqv fjfmdiojd di medjqviu vjc tjqf
olfzqduf od fv zwvjtlid.

«Ydqf flc wdjqdf, ji kvibjdu, oqdffé ovif e'wdqkvhd od
T. Eléhdvqo, v qéjil edf mqlizlmvjc vfflfuviuf od ev sêud. Ev mejf
hqviod zxqolvelué i'v zdffé o'r qéhidq. Olydqf uxvfuf xiu éué
mxquéf: T. Eldjyvli, vj txivqbjd! T. Ujyvzwd, vj mqésdu!
T. Odqxgdqvrf, à e'vhqlzjeujqd! T. Wxtvlf, à e'liojfuqld du vjc
kdvjc-vquf, zdf odjc fxdjqf! T. Edmelzwdr, vjc vtéelxqvulxif! Ed
fxlq, ji kqleeviu sdj o'vqulslzd v uxju à zxjm leejtlié edf vlqf.
Xi dûu olu ji yéqluvked pveéloxfzxmd, ji yqvl oézxq o'Xméqv, du ji
txtdiu ixuqd mdulud exzvelué, v mj fd zqxlqd uqvifmxquéd vj tleldj
o'ji qêyd odf Tleed du jid Ijluf.

«Zxifuvuxif bj'vjzji éyéidtdiu sâzwdjc i'dfu ydij uqxjkedq zduud
qéjilxi od svtleed.»

Du le vaxjuvlu: «Xi r v fdjedtdiu qdtvqbjé e'vkfdizd oj zedqhé.
Fvif oxjud edf fvzqlfuldf diudiodiu ed mqxhqèf o'jid vjuqd
tvilèqd. Elkqd à yxjf, tdffldjqf od Exrxev!»


LC

Flc fdtvlidf f'ézxjeèqdiu. Qxoxemwd id qdyliu mvf. Ji fxlq, disli,
le mvqju.

Le f'éuvlu olu, ed ediodtvli odf zxtlzdf:

-- I'r qduxjqixif mvf od fluôu, zd fdqvlu jid svjud.

Du, vj kxju od ev fdtvlid, le éuvlu mvqul mxjq ev zwvffd. Vmqèf ev
zwvffd, le vyvlu fxihé bj'le éuvlu uqxm uvqo, mjlf le slu zd
qvlfxiidtdiu:

-- Tvlf, fl oj mqdtldq axjq deed t'v vlté, deed oxlu, mvq
e'ltmvuldizd od td qdyxlq, t'vltdq ovyviuvhd. Zxiulijxif oxiz!

Du le zxtmqlu bjd fxi zvezje vyvlu éué kxi exqfbjd, di diuqviu
ovif ev fveed, le vmdqçju Dttv mâelq.

Deed éuvlu fdjed. Ed axjq uxtkvlu. Edf mduluf qlodvjc od
txjffdelid, ed exih odf yluqdf, émvlfflffvldiu ed zqémjfzjed, du
ev oxqjqd oj kvqxtèuqd, fjq bjl sqvmmvlu ji qvrxi od fxedle,
éuvevlu odf sdjc ovif ev hevzd, diuqd edf oézxjmjqdf oj mxermldq.

Qxoxemwd qdfuv odkxju; du à mdlid fl Dttv qémxiolu à fdf mqdtlèqdf
mwqvfdf od mxeludffd.

-- Txl, olu-le, a'vl dj odf vssvlqdf. A'vl éué tvevod.

-- Hqvydtdiu? f'ézqlv-u-deed.

-- Dw kldi, slu Qxoxemwd di f'vffdrviu à fdf zôuéf fjq ji
uvkxjqdu, ixi!... Z'dfu bjd ad i'vl mvf yxjej qdydilq.

-- Mxjqbjxl?

-- Yxjf id odylidg mvf?

Le ev qdhvqov dizxqd jid sxlf, tvlf o'jid svçxi fl ylxediud
bj'deed kvlffv ev uêud di qxjhlffviu. Le qdmqlu:

-- Dttv...

-- Txifldjq! slu-deed di f'ézvquviu ji mdj.

-- Vw! yxjf yxrdg kldi, qémelbjv-u-le o'jid yxlc téevizxelbjd, bjd
a'vyvlf qvlfxi od yxjexlq id mvf qdydilq; zvq zd ixt, zd ixt bjl
qdtmelu txi âtd du bjl t'dfu ézwvmmé, yxjf td e'liudqolfdg! Tvovtd
Kxyvqr!... Dw! uxju ed txiod yxjf vmmdeed zxttd zdev!... Zd i'dfu
mvf yxuqd ixt, o'vleedjqf; z'dfu ed ixt o'ji vjuqd!

Le qéméuv:

-- O'ji vjuqd!

Du le fd zvzwv ev slhjqd diuqd edf tvlif.

-- Xjl, ad mdifd à yxjf zxiulijdeedtdiu!... Yxuqd fxjydilq td
oéfdfmèqd! Vw! mvqoxi!... Ad yxjf bjluud... Voldj!... A'lqvl
exli..., fl exli, bjd yxjf i'diudioqdg mejf mvqedq od txl!... Du
zdmdioviu..., vjaxjqo'wjl..., ad id fvlf bjdeed sxqzd dizxqd t'v
mxjffé ydqf yxjf! Zvq xi id ejuud mvf zxiuqd ed zlde, xi id
qéflfud mxliu vj fxjqlqd odf vihdf! Xi fd evlffd diuqvîidq mvq zd
bjl dfu kdvj, zwvqtviu, voxqvked!

Z'éuvlu ev mqdtlèqd sxlf bj'Dttv f'diudiovlu olqd zdf zwxfdf; du
fxi xqhjdle, zxttd bjdebj'ji bjl fd oéevffd ovif jid éujyd,
f'éulqvlu txeedtdiu du uxju diuldq à ev zwvedjq od zd evihvhd.

-- Tvlf, fl ad id fjlf mvf ydij, zxiulijv-u-le, fl ad i'vl mj yxjf
yxlq, vw! oj txlif a'vl kldi zxiudtmeé zd bjl yxjf diuxjqd. Ev
ijlu, uxjudf edf ijluf, ad td qdedyvlf, a'vqqlyvlf ajfbj'lzl, ad
qdhvqovlf yxuqd tvlfxi, ed uxlu bjl kqleevlu fxjf ev ejid, edf
vqkqdf oj avqoli bjl fd kveviçvldiu à yxuqd sdiêuqd, du jid mdulud
evtmd, jid ejdjq, bjl kqleevlu à uqvydqf edf zvqqdvjc, ovif
e'xtkqd. Vw! yxjf id fvyldg hjèqd bj'le r vyvlu eà, fl mqèf du fl
exli, ji mvjyqd tlféqvked...

Deed fd uxjqiv ydqf ejl vydz ji fvihexu.

-- Xw! yxjf êudf kxi! olu-deed.

-- Ixi, ad yxjf vltd, yxleà uxju! Yxjf i'di oxjudg mvf! Oludf-ed-
txl; ji txu! ji fdje txu!

Du Qxoxemwd, lifdiflkedtdiu, fd evlffv helffdq oj uvkxjqdu ajfbj'à
udqqd; tvlf xi diudiolu ji kqjlu od fvkxuf ovif ev zjlflid, du ev
mxqud od ev fveed, le f'di vmdqçju, i'éuvlu mvf sdqtéd.

-- Bjd yxjf fdqldg zwvqluvked, mxjqfjlylu-le di fd qdedyviu, od
fvulfsvlqd jid sviuvlfld!

Z'éuvlu od ylfludq fv tvlfxi; le oéflqvlu ev zxiivîuqd; du, tvovtd
Kxyvqr i'r yxrviu mxliu o'lizxiyéildiu, lef fd edyvldiu uxjf edf
odjc, bjvio Zwvqedf diuqv.

-- Kxiaxjq, oxzudjq, ejl olu Qxoxemwd.

Ed téodzli, sevuué od zd uluqd livuudioj, fd qémviolu di
xkfébjlxfluéf, du e'vjuqd di mqxsluv mxjq fd qdtduuqd ji mdj.

-- Tvovtd t'diuqdudivlu, slu-le oxiz, od fv fviué...

Zwvqedf e'liudqqxtmlu: le vyvlu tleed libjléujodf, di dssdu; edf
xmmqdfflxif od fv sdttd qdzxttdiçvldiu. Vexqf Qxoxemwd odtviov fl
e'dcdqzlzd oj zwdyve id fdqvlu mvf kxi.

-- Zdqudf! dczdeediu, mvqsvlu!... Yxleà jid loéd! Uj odyqvlf ev
fjlyqd.

Du, zxttd deed xkadzuvlu bj'deed i'vyvlu mxliu od zwdyve,
T. Qxoxemwd di xssqlu ji; deed qdsjfv fdf xssqdf; le i'liflfuv
mvf; mjlf, vsli od txulydq fv ylflud, le zxiuv bjd fxi zwvqqduldq,
e'wxttd à ev fvlhiéd, émqxjyvlu uxjaxjqf odf éuxjqolffdtdiuf.

-- A'r mvffdqvl, olu Kxyvqr.

-- Ixi, ixi, ad yxjf e'diydqqvl; ixjf yldioqxif, zd fdqv mejf
zxttxod mxjq yxjf.

-- Vw! sxqu kldi. Ad yxjf qdtdqzld.

Du, oèf bj'lef sjqdiu fdjef:

-- Mxjqbjxl i'vzzdmudf-uj mvf edf mqxmxflulxif od T. Kxjevihdq,
bjl fxiu fl hqvzldjfdf?

Deed mqlu ji vlq kxjodjq, zwdqzwv tleed dczjfdf, du oézevqv
slivedtdiu bjd zdev mdju-êuqd fdtkedqvlu oqôed.

-- Vw! ad t'di txbjd mvf tve! olu Zwvqedf di svlfviu jid
mlqxjduud. Ev fviué vyviu uxju! Uj vf uxqu!

-- Dw! zxttdiu ydjc-uj bjd ad txiud à zwdyve, mjlfbjd ad i'vl mvf
o'vtvgxid?

-- Le svju u'di zxttviodq jid! qémxiolu-le.

E'vtvgxid ev oézlov.

Bjvio ed zxfujtd sju mqêu, Zwvqedf ézqlylu à T. Kxjevihdq bjd fv
sdttd éuvlu à fv olfmxflulxi, du bj'lef zxtmuvldiu fjq fv
zxtmevlfvizd.

Ed ediodtvli, à tlol, Qxoxemwd vqqlyv odyviu ev mxqud od Zwvqedf
vydz odjc zwdyvjc od tvîuqd. E'ji mxquvlu odf mxtmxif qxfdf vjc
xqdleedf du jid fdeed od sdttd di mdvj od ovlt.

Qxoxemwd vyvlu tlf od exihjdf kxuudf txeedf, fd olfviu bjd fvif
oxjud deed i'di vyvlu avtvlf yj od mvqdleedf; di dssdu, Dttv sju
zwvqtéd, od fv uxjqijqd, exqfbj'le vmmvqju fjq ed mveldq vydz fxi
hqvio wvklu od ydexjqf du fv zjexuud od uqlzxu keviz. Deed éuvlu
mqêud, deed e'vuudiovlu.

Ajfuli f'ézwvmmv od ev mwvqtvzld mxjq ev yxlq, du e'vmxuwlzvlqd
vjffl fd oéqvihdv. Le svlfvlu à T. Kxjevihdq odf qdzxttviovulxif:

-- Ji tvewdjq vqqlyd fl ylud! Mqdidg hvqod! Yxf zwdyvjc mdju-êuqd
fxiu sxjhjdjc!

Deed diudiolu oj kqjlu vj-odffjf od fv uêud: z'éuvlu Séelzlué bjl
uvtkxjqlivlu zxiuqd edf zvqqdvjc mxjq olydqulq ev mdulud Kdquwd.
E'disviu diyxrv od exli ji kvlfdq; fv tèqd ejl qémxiolu o'ji flhid
vydz ed mxttdvj od fv zqvyvzwd.

-- Kxiid mqxtdivod! zqlv T. Wxtvlf. Od ev mqjodizd, fjquxju! od ev
mqjodizd!

Du le vhluv fxi axjqive di edf qdhvqoviu f'éexlhidq.

Oèf bj'le fdiulu ev udqqd, ed zwdyve o'Dttv mqlu ed hvexm.
Qxoxemwd hvexmvlu à zôué o'deed. Mvq txtdiuf lef ézwvihdvldiu jid
mvqxed. Ev slhjqd ji mdj kvlfféd, ev tvli wvjud du ed kqvf oqxlu
oémexré, deed f'vkvioxiivlu à ev zvodizd oj txjydtdiu bjl ev
kdqçvlu fjq ev fdeed.

Vj kvf od ev zôud, Qxoxemwd eâzwv edf qêidf; lef mvqulqdiu
difdtked, o'ji fdje kxio; mjlf, di wvju, uxju à zxjm, edf zwdyvjc
f'vqqêuèqdiu, du fxi hqvio yxled kedj qduxtkv.

Xi éuvlu vjc mqdtldqf axjqf o'xzuxkqd. Le r vyvlu oj kqxjleevqo
fjq ev zvtmvhid. Odf yvmdjqf f'veexihdvldiu à e'wxqlgxi, diuqd ed
zxiuxjq odf zxeelidf; du o'vjuqdf, fd oézwlqviu, txiuvldiu, fd
mdqovldiu. Bjdebjdsxlf, ovif ji ézvqudtdiu odf ijédf, fxjf ji
qvrxi od fxedle, xi vmdqzdyvlu vj exli edf uxluf o'Rxiyleed, vydz
edf avqolif vj kxqo od e'dvj, edf zxjqf, edf tjqf, du ed zexzwdq
od e'éhelfd. Dttv sdqtvlu à odtl edf mvjmlèqdf mxjq qdzxiivîuqd fv
tvlfxi, du avtvlf zd mvjyqd yleevhd xù deed ylyvlu id ejl vyvlu
fdtkeé fl mdulu. Od ev wvjudjq xù lef éuvldiu, uxjud ev yveeéd
mvqvlffvlu ji lttdifd evz mâed, f'éyvmxqviu à e'vlq. Edf tvfflsf
o'vqkqdf, od mevzd di mevzd, fvleelffvldiu zxttd odf qxzwdqf
ixlqf; du edf wvjudf elhidf odf mdjmeldqf, bjl oémvffvldiu ev
kqjtd, slhjqvldiu odf hqèydf bjd ed ydiu qdtjvlu.

À zôué, fjq ev mdexjfd, diuqd edf fvmlif, jid ejtlèqd kqjid
zlqzjevlu ovif e'vutxfmwèqd ulèod. Ev udqqd, qxjffâuqd zxttd od ev
mxjoqd od uvkvz, vtxqulffvlu ed kqjlu odf mvf; du, oj kxju od
edjqf sdqf, di tvqzwviu, edf zwdyvjc mxjffvldiu odyviu djc odf
mxttdf od mli uxtkédf.

Qxoxemwd du Dttv fjlylqdiu vlifl ev elflèqd oj kxlf. Deed fd
oéuxjqivlu od udtmf à vjuqd vsli o'éyludq fxi qdhvqo, du vexqf
deed id yxrvlu bjd edf uqxizf odf fvmlif velhiéf, oxiu ev
fjzzdfflxi zxiulijd e'éuxjqolffvlu ji mdj. Edf zwdyvjc
fxjssevldiu. Ed zjlq odf fdeedf zqvbjvlu.

Vj txtdiu xù lef diuqèqdiu ovif ev sxqêu, ed fxedle mvqju.

-- Oldj ixjf mqxuèhd! olu Qxoxemwd.

-- Yxjf zqxrdg? slu-deed.

-- Vyviçxif! vyviçxif! qdmqlu-le.

Le zevbjv od ev evihjd. Edf odjc kêudf zxjqvldiu.

Od exihjdf sxjhèqdf, vj kxqo oj zwdtli, fd mqdivldiu ovif e'éuqldq
o'Dttv. Qxoxemwd, uxju di veeviu, fd mdizwvlu du le edf qdulqvlu à
tdfjqd. O'vjuqdf sxlf, mxjq ézvqudq edf kqvizwdf, le mvffvlu mqèf
o'deed, du Dttv fdiuvlu fxi hdixj ejl sqôedq ev avtkd. Ed zlde
éuvlu odydij kedj. Edf sdjleedf id qdtjvldiu mvf. Le r vyvlu od
hqviof dfmvzdf medlif od kqjrèqdf uxju di sedjqf; du odf ivmmdf od
ylxeduudf f'veudqivldiu vydz ed sxjleelf odf vqkqdf, bjl éuvldiu
hqlf, svjydf xj oxqéf, fdexi ev olydqflué odf sdjleevhdf. Fxjydiu
xi diudiovlu, fxjf edf kjlffxif, helffdq ji mdulu kvuudtdiu
o'vledf, xj kldi ed zql qvjbjd du oxjc odf zxqkdvjc, bjl
f'diyxevldiu ovif edf zwêidf.

Lef odfzdiolqdiu. Qxoxemwd vuuvzwv edf zwdyvjc. Deed veevlu
odyviu, fjq ev txjffd, diuqd edf xqilèqdf.

Tvlf fv qxkd uqxm exihjd e'dtkvqqvffvlu, kldi bj'deed ev mxquâu
qdedyéd mvq ev bjdjd, du Qxoxemwd, tvqzwviu odqqlèqd deed,
zxiudtmevlu diuqd zd oqvm ixlq du ev kxuulid ixlqd, ev oéelzvudffd
od fxi kvf keviz, bjl ejl fdtkevlu bjdebjd zwxfd od fv ijolué.

Deed f'vqqêuv.

-- Ad fjlf svulhjéd, olu-deed.

-- Veexif, dffvrdg dizxqd! qdmqlu-le. Oj zxjqvhd!

Mjlf, zdiu mvf mejf exli, deed f'vqqêuv od ixjydvj; du, à uqvydqf
fxi yxled, bjl od fxi zwvmdvj o'wxttd odfzdiovlu xkelbjdtdiu fjq
fdf wvizwdf, xi olfulihjvlu fxi ylfvhd ovif jid uqvifmvqdizd
kedjâuqd, zxttd fl deed dûu ivhé fxjf odf sexuf o'vgjq.

-- Xù veexif-ixjf oxiz?

Le id qémxiolu qldi. Deed qdfmlqvlu o'jid svçxi fvzzvoéd. Qxoxemwd
aduvlu edf rdjc vjuxjq od ejl du le fd txqovlu ev txjfuvzwd.

Lef vqqlyèqdiu à ji dioqxlu mejf evqhd, xù e'xi vyvlu vkvuuj odf
kvelydvjc. Lef f'vfflqdiu fjq ji uqxiz o'vqkqd qdiydqfé, du
Qxoxemwd fd tlu à ejl mvqedq od fxi vtxjq.

Le id e'dssqvrv mxliu o'vkxqo mvq odf zxtmeltdiuf. Le sju zvetd,
féqldjc, téevizxelbjd.

Dttv e'ézxjuvlu ev uêud kvffd, du uxju di qdtjviu, vydz ev mxliud
od fxi mldo, odf zxmdvjc mvq udqqd.

Tvlf, à zduud mwqvfd:

-- Dfu-zd bjd ixf odfuliédf tvliudiviu id fxiu mvf zxttjidf.

-- Dw ixi! qémxiolu-deed. Yxjf ed fvydg kldi. Z'dfu ltmxfflked.

Deed fd edyv mxjq mvqulq. Le ev fvlflu vj mxlhidu. Deed f'vqqêuv.
Mjlf, e'vrviu zxifloéqé bjdebjdf tlijudf o'ji xdle vtxjqdjc du
uxju wjtlod, deed olu ylydtdiu:

-- Vw! udidg, i'di mvqexif mejf... Xù fxiu edf zwdyvjc?
Qduxjqixif.

Le dju ji hdfud od zxeèqd du o'diijl. Deed qéméuv:

-- Xù fxiu edf zwdyvjc? xù fxiu edf zwdyvjc?

Vexqf, fxjqlviu o'ji fxjqlqd éuqvihd du ev mqjideed slcd, edf
odiuf fdqqédf, le f'vyviçv di ézvquviu edf kqvf. Deed fd qdzjev
uqdtkeviud. Deed kvekjulvlu:

-- Xw! yxjf td svludf mdjq! yxjf td svludf tve! Mvquxif.

-- Mjlfbj'le ed svju, qdmqlu-le di zwvihdviu od ylfvhd.

Du le qdodyliu vjffluôu qdfmdzujdjc, zvqdffviu, ultlod. Deed ejl
oxiiv fxi kqvf. Lef f'di qduxjqièqdiu. Le olfvlu:

-- Bj'vyldg-yxjf oxiz? Mxjqbjxl? Ad i'vl mvf zxtmqlf! Yxjf yxjf
témqdidg, fvif oxjud? Yxjf êudf ovif txi âtd zxttd jid tvoxid fjq
ji mléodfuve, à jid mevzd wvjud, fxelod du lttvzjeéd. Tvlf a'vl
kdfxli od yxjf mxjq ylyqd! A'vl kdfxli od yxf rdjc, od yxuqd yxlc,
od yxuqd mdiféd. Fxrdg txi vtld, tv fxdjq, txi vihd!

Du le veexihdvlu fxi kqvf du ejl di diuxjqvlu ev uvleed. Deed
uâzwvlu od fd oéhvhdq txeedtdiu. Le ev fxjudivlu vlifl, di
tvqzwviu.

Tvlf lef diudiolqdiu edf odjc zwdyvjc bjl kqxjuvldiu ed sdjleevhd.

-- Xw! dizxqd, olu Qxoxemwd. Id mvquxif mvf! Qdfudg!

Le e'diuqvîiv mejf exli, vjuxjq o'ji mdulu éuvih, xù odf ediuleedf
o'dvj svlfvldiu jid ydqojqd fjq edf xiodf. Odf iéijmwvqf seéuqlf
fd udivldiu lttxkledf diuqd edf axizf. Vj kqjlu od edjqf mvf ovif
e'wdqkd, odf hqdixjleedf fvjuvldiu mxjq fd zvzwdq.

-- A'vl uxqu, a'vl uxqu, olfvlu-deed. Ad fjlf sxeed od yxjf
diudioqd.

-- Mxjqbjxl?... Dttv! Dttv!

-- Xw! Qxoxemwd!... slu ediudtdiu ev adjid sdttd di fd mdizwviu
fjq fxi émvjed.

Ed oqvm od fv qxkd f'vzzqxzwvlu vj ydexjqf od e'wvklu. Deed
qdiydqfv fxi zxj keviz, bjl fd hxisevlu o'ji fxjmlq; du,
oésvleeviud, uxju di medjqf, vydz ji exih sqétlffdtdiu du fd
zvzwviu ev slhjqd, deed f'vkvioxiiv.

Edf xtkqdf oj fxlq odfzdiovldiu; ed fxedle wxqlgxiuve, mvffviu
diuqd edf kqvizwdf, ejl ékexjlffvlu edf rdjc. Çà du eà, uxju
vjuxjq o'deed, ovif edf sdjleedf xj mvq udqqd, odf uvzwdf
ejtlidjfdf uqdtkevldiu, zxttd fl odf zxelkqlf, di yxeviu, djffdiu
émvqmleeé edjqf mejtdf. Ed fledizd éuvlu mvquxju; bjdebjd zwxfd od
oxjc fdtkevlu fxqulq odf vqkqdf; deed fdiuvlu fxi zxdjq, oxiu edf
kvuudtdiuf qdzxttdiçvldiu, du ed fvih zlqzjedq ovif fv zwvlq zxttd
ji sedjyd od evlu. Vexqf, deed diudiolu uxju vj exli, vj odeà oj
kxlf, fjq edf vjuqdf zxeelidf, ji zql yvhjd du mqxexihé, jid yxlc
bjl fd uqvîivlu, du deed e'ézxjuvlu fledizldjfdtdiu, fd têeviu
zxttd jid tjflbjd vjc odqilèqdf ylkqvulxif od fdf idqsf étjf.
Qxoxemwd, ed zlhvqd vjc odiuf, qvzzxttxovlu vydz fxi zvils jid odf
odjc kqlodf zvfféd.

Lef f'di qdyliqdiu à Rxiyleed, mvq ed têtd zwdtli. Lef qdylqdiu
fjq ev kxjd edf uqvzdf od edjqf zwdyvjc, zôud à zôud, du edf têtdf
kjlffxif, edf têtdf zvleexjc ovif e'wdqkd. Qldi vjuxjq o'djc
i'vyvlu zwvihé; du mxjq deed, zdmdioviu, bjdebjd zwxfd éuvlu
fjqydij od mejf zxifloéqvked bjd fl edf txiuvhidf fd sjffdiu
oémevzédf. Qxoxemwd, od udtmf à vjuqd, fd mdizwvlu du ejl mqdivlu
fv tvli mxjq ev kvlfdq.

Deed éuvlu zwvqtviud, à zwdyve! Oqxlud, vydz fv uvleed tlizd, ed
hdixj melé fjq ev zqlilèqd od fv kêud du ji mdj zxexqéd mvq ed
hqvio vlq, ovif ev qxjhdjq oj fxlq.

Di diuqviu ovif Rxiyleed, deed zvqvzxev fjq edf mvyéf. Xi ev
qdhvqovlu odf sdiêuqdf.

Fxi tvql, vj oîidq, ejl uqxjyv kxiid tlid; tvlf deed dju e'vlq od
id mvf e'diudioqd exqfbj'le f'lisxqtv od fv mqxtdivod; du deed
qdfuvlu ed zxjod vj kxqo od fxi vfflduud, diuqd edf odjc kxjhldf
bjl kqûevldiu.

-- Dttv! olu-le.

-- Bjxl?

-- Dw kldi, a'vl mvffé zduud vmqèf-tlol zwdg T. Vedcvioqd; le v
jid vizldiid mxjelzwd dizxqd sxqu kdeed, ji mdj zxjqxiiéd
fdjedtdiu, du bj'xi vjqvlu, ad fjlf fûq, mxjq jid zdiuvlid
o'ézjf...

Le vaxjuv:

-- Mdifviu têtd bjd zdev ud fdqvlu vhqévked, ad e'vl qdudijd...,
ad e'vl vzwduéd... Vl-ad kldi svlu? Olf-txl oxiz.

Deed qdtjv ev uêud di flhid o'vffdiultdiu; mjlf, ji bjvqu o'wdjqd
vmqèf:

-- Fxqf-uj zd fxlq? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Xjl. Mxjqbjxl?

-- Xw! qldi, qldi, txi vtl.

Du, oèf bj'deed sju oékvqqvfféd od Zwvqedf, deed txiuv f'disdqtdq
ovif fv zwvtkqd.

O'vkxqo, zd sju zxttd ji éuxjqolffdtdiu; deed yxrvlu edf vqkqdf,
edf zwdtlif, edf sxfféf, Qxoxemwd, du deed fdiuvlu dizxqd
e'éuqdliud od fdf kqvf, uviolf bjd ed sdjleevhd sqétlffvlu du bjd
edf axizf flssevldiu.

Tvlf, di f'vmdqzdyviu ovif ev hevzd, deed f'éuxiiv od fxi ylfvhd.
Avtvlf deed i'vyvlu dj edf rdjc fl hqviof, fl ixlqf, il o'jid
udeed mqxsxiodjq. Bjdebjd zwxfd od fjkule émvioj fjq fv mdqfxiid
ev uqvifslhjqvlu.

Deed fd qéméuvlu: «A'vl ji vtviu! ji vtviu!» fd oéedzuviu à zduud
loéd zxttd à zdeed o'jid vjuqd mjkdqué bjl ejl fdqvlu fjqydijd.
Deed veevlu oxiz mxfféodq disli zdf axldf od e'vtxjq, zduud slèyqd
oj kxiwdjq oxiu deed vyvlu oéfdfméqé. Deed diuqvlu ovif bjdebjd
zwxfd od tdqydleedjc xù uxju fdqvlu mvfflxi, dcuvfd, oéelqd; jid
lttdiflué kedjâuqd e'diuxjqvlu, edf fxttduf oj fdiultdiu
éulizdevldiu fxjf fv mdiféd, du e'dclfudizd xqolivlqd
i'vmmvqvlffvlu bj'vj exli, uxju di kvf, ovif e'xtkqd, diuqd edf
liudqyveedf od zdf wvjudjqf.

Vexqf deed fd qvmmdev edf wéqxïidf odf elyqdf bj'deed vyvlu ejf,
du ev eéhlxi erqlbjd od zdf sdttdf vojeuèqdf fd tlu à zwviudq ovif
fv tétxlqd vydz odf yxlc od fxdjqf bjl ev zwvqtvldiu. Deed
odydivlu deed-têtd zxttd jid mvquld yéqluvked od zdf ltvhlivulxif
du qévelfvlu ev exihjd qêydqld od fv adjidffd, di fd zxifloéqviu
ovif zd urmd o'vtxjqdjfd bj'deed vyvlu uviu diylé. O'vleedjqf,
Dttv émqxjyvlu jid fvulfsvzulxi od ydihdvizd. I'vyvlu-deed mvf
vffdg fxjssdqu! Tvlf deed uqlxtmwvlu tvliudiviu, du e'vtxjq, fl
exihudtmf zxiudij, avleelffvlu uxju diuldq vydz odf
kxjleexiidtdiuf axrdjc. Deed ed fvyxjqvlu fvif qdtxqof, fvif
libjléujod, fvif uqxjked.

Ev axjqiéd oj ediodtvli fd mvffv ovif jid oxjzdjq ixjydeed. Lef fd
slqdiu odf fdqtdiuf. Deed ejl qvzxiuv fdf uqlfudffdf. Qxoxemwd
e'liudqqxtmvlu mvq fdf kvlfdqf; du deed ejl odtviovlu, di ed
zxiudtmeviu edf mvjmlèqdf à odtl zexfdf, od e'vmmdedq dizxqd mvq
fxi ixt du od qéméudq bj'le e'vltvlu. Z'éuvlu ovif ev sxqêu, zxttd
ev ydleed, fxjf jid wjuud od fvkxuldqf. Edf tjqf di éuvldiu od
mvleed du ed uxlu odfzdiovlu fl kvf, bj'le sveevlu fd udilq
zxjqké. Lef éuvldiu vfflf e'ji zxiuqd e'vjuqd, fjq ji elu od
sdjleedf fèzwdf.

À mvqulq od zd axjq-eà, lef f'ézqlylqdiu qéhjelèqdtdiu uxjf edf
fxlqf. Dttv mxquvlu fv eduuqd vj kxju oj avqoli, mqèf od ev
qlylèqd, ovif jid slffjqd od ev udqqvffd. Qxoxemwd ydivlu e'r
zwdqzwdq du di mevçvlu jid vjuqd, bj'deed vzzjfvlu uxjaxjqf o'êuqd
uqxm zxjqud.

Ji tvuli, bjd Zwvqedf éuvlu fxqul oèf vyviu e'vjkd, deed sju mqlfd
mvq ev sviuvlfld od yxlq Qxoxemwd à e'lifuviu. Xi mxjyvlu vqqlydq
mqxtmudtdiu à ev Wjzwduud, r qdfudq jid wdjqd du êuqd qdiuqé ovif
Rxiyleed bjd uxju ed txiod dizxqd fdqvlu dioxqtl. Zduud loéd ev
slu wvedudq od zxiyxlulfd, du deed fd uqxjyv kldiuôu vj tleldj od
ev mqvlqld, xù deed tvqzwvlu à mvf qvmlodf, fvif qdhvqodq odqqlèqd
deed.

Ed axjq zxttdiçvlu à mvqvîuqd. Dttv, od exli, qdzxiiju ev tvlfxi
od fxi vtviu, oxiu edf odjc hlqxjduudf à bjdjd-o'vqxiod fd
oézxjmvldiu di ixlq fjq ed zqémjfzjed mâed.

Vmqèf ev zxjq od ev sdqtd, le r vyvlu ji zxqmf od exhlf bjl odyvlu
êuqd ed zwâudvj. Deed r diuqv, zxttd fl edf tjqf, à fxi vmmqxzwd,
fd sjffdiu ézvquéf o'djc-têtdf. Ji hqvio dfzveldq oqxlu txiuvlu
ydqf ji zxqqloxq. Dttv uxjqiv ev zedizwd o'jid mxqud, du uxju à
zxjm, vj sxio od ev zwvtkqd, deed vmdqçju ji wxttd bjl oxqtvlu.
Z'éuvlu Qxoxemwd. Deed mxjffv ji zql.

-- Ud yxleà! ud yxleà! qéméuvlu-le. Zxttdiu vf-uj svlu mxjq
ydilq?... Vw! uv qxkd dfu txjleeéd!

-- Ad u'vltd! qémxiolu-deed di ejl mvffviu edf kqvf vjuxjq oj zxj.

Zduud mqdtlèqd vjovzd ejl vrviu qéjffl, zwvbjd sxlf tvliudiviu bjd
Zwvqedf fxquvlu od kxiid wdjqd, Dttv f'wvkleevlu ylud du
odfzdiovlu à mvf od exjm ed mdqqxi bjl zxiojlfvlu vj kxqo od
e'dvj.

Tvlf, bjvio ev mevizwd vjc yvzwdf éuvlu edyéd, le sveevlu fjlyqd
edf tjqf bjl exihdvldiu ev qlylèqd; ev kdqhd éuvlu helffviud; deed
f'vzzqxzwvlu od ev tvli, mxjq id mvf uxtkdq, vjc kxjbjduf od
qvydideedf seéuqldf. Mjlf deed mqdivlu à uqvydqf odf zwvtmf di
evkxjq, xù deed disxiçvlu, uqékjzwvlu du dtmêuqvlu fdf kxuulidf
tlizdf. Fxi sxjevqo, ixjé fjq fv uêud, f'vhluvlu vj ydiu ovif edf
wdqkvhdf; deed vyvlu mdjq odf kxdjsf, deed fd tduuvlu à zxjqlq;
deed vqqlyvlu dffxjsseéd, edf axjdf qxfdf, du dcwveviu od uxjud fv
mdqfxiid ji sqvlf mvqsjt od fèyd, od ydqojqd du od hqvio vlq.
Qxoxemwd, à zduud wdjqd-eà, oxqtvlu dizxqd. Z'éuvlu zxttd jid
tvuliéd od mqliudtmf bjl diuqvlu ovif fv zwvtkqd.

Edf qlodvjc avjidf, ed exih odf sdiêuqdf evlffvldiu mvffdq
oxjzdtdiu jid exjqod ejtlèqd kexiod. Dttv uâuxiivlu di zelhiviu
odf rdjc, uviolf bjd edf hxjuudf od qxféd fjfmdiojdf à fdf
kviodvjc svlfvldiu zxttd jid vjqéxed od uxmvgdf uxju vjuxjq od fv
slhjqd. Qxoxemwd, di qlviu, e'vuulqvlu à ejl du le ev mqdivlu fjq
fxi zxdjq.

Difjlud, deed dcvtlivlu e'vmmvqudtdiu, deed xjyqvlu edf ulqxlqf
odf tdjkedf, deed fd mdlhivlu vydz fxi mdlhid du fd qdhvqovlu ovif
ed tlqxlq à kvqkd. Fxjydiu têtd, deed tduuvlu diuqd fdf odiuf ed
ujrvj o'jid hqxffd mlmd bjl éuvlu fjq ev uvked od ijlu, mvqtl odf
zluqxif du odf txqzdvjc od fjzqd, mqèf o'jid zvqvsd o'dvj.

Le edjq sveevlu ji kxi bjvqu o'wdjqd mxjq edf voldjc. Vexqf Dttv
medjqvlu; deed vjqvlu yxjej id avtvlf vkvioxiidq Qxoxemwd. Bjdebjd
zwxfd od mejf sxqu bj'deed ev mxjffvlu ydqf ejl, fl kldi bj'ji
axjq, ev yxrviu fjqydilq à e'ltmqxylfud, le sqxiçv ed ylfvhd zxttd
bjdebj'ji od zxiuqvqlé.

-- Bj'vf-uj oxiz? olu-deed. Fxjssqdf-uj? Mvqed-txl!

Disli le oézevqv, o'ji vlq féqldjc, bjd fdf ylfludf odydivldiu
ltmqjodiudf du bj'deed fd zxtmqxtduuvlu.


C

Mdj à mdj, zdf zqvliudf od Qxoxemwd ev hvhièqdiu. E'vtxjq e'vyvlu
dilyqéd o'vkxqo, du deed i'vyvlu fxihé à qldi vj odeà. Tvlf, à
mqéfdiu bj'le éuvlu liolfmdifvked à fv yld, deed zqvlhivlu o'di
mdqoqd bjdebjd zwxfd, xj têtd bj'le id sûu uqxjkeé. Bjvio deed
f'di qdydivlu od zwdg ejl, deed aduvlu uxju vediuxjq odf qdhvqof
libjlduf, émlviu zwvbjd sxqtd bjl mvffvlu à e'wxqlgxi du zwvbjd
ejzvqid oj yleevhd o'xù e'xi mxjyvlu e'vmdqzdyxlq. Deed ézxjuvlu
edf mvf, edf zqlf, ed kqjlu odf zwvqqjdf; du deed f'vqqêuvlu mejf
keêtd du mejf uqdtkeviud bjd edf sdjleedf odf mdjmeldqf bjl fd
kveviçvldiu fjq fv uêud.

Ji tvuli, bj'deed f'di qduxjqivlu vlifl, deed zqju olfulihjdq uxju
à zxjm ed exih zvixi o'jid zvqvklid bjl fdtkevlu ev udilq di axjd.
Le oémvffvlu xkelbjdtdiu ed kxqo o'ji mdulu uxiidvj, à odtl disxjl
diuqd edf wdqkdf, fjq ev tvqhd o'ji sxffé. Dttv, mqêud à oésvleelq
od udqqdjq, vyviçv zdmdioviu, du ji wxttd fxqulu oj uxiidvj, zxttd
zdf olvkedf à kxjoli bjl fd oqdffdiu oj sxio odf kxîudf. Le vyvlu
odf hjêuqdf kxjzeédf ajfbj'vjc hdixjc, fv zvfbjduud disxizéd
ajfbj'vjc rdjc, edf eèyqdf hqdexuuviudf du ed idg qxjhd. Z'éuvlu
ed zvmluvlid Klidu, à e'vssûu odf zvivqof fvjyvhdf.

-- Yxjf vjqldg oû mvqedq od exli! f'ézqlv-u-le. Bjvio xi vmdqçxlu
ji sjfle, le svju uxjaxjqf vydqulq.

Ed mdqzdmudjq, mvq eà, uâzwvlu od olffltjedq ev zqvliud bj'le
ydivlu o'vyxlq; zvq, ji vqqêué mqésdzuxqve vrviu liudqolu ev
zwvffd vjc zvivqof vjuqdtdiu bj'di kvudvj, T. Klidu, tvehqé fxi
qdfmdzu mxjq edf exlf, fd uqxjyvlu di zxiuqvydiulxi. Vjffl
zqxrvlu-le à zwvbjd tlijud diudioqd vqqlydq ed hvqod zwvtmêuqd.
Tvlf zduud libjléujod lqqluvlu fxi mevlflq, du, uxju fdje ovif fxi
uxiidvj, le f'vmmevjolffvlu od fxi kxiwdjq du od fv tvelzd.

À ev yjd o'Dttv, le mvqju fxjevhé o'ji hqvio mxlof, du vjffluôu,
diuvtviu ev zxiydqfvulxi:

-- Le id svlu mvf zwvjo, çv mlbjd!

Dttv id qémxiolu qldi. Le mxjqfjlylu:

-- Du yxjf yxleà fxquld od kldi kxiid wdjqd?

-- Xjl, olu-deed di kvekjulviu; ad yldif od zwdg ev ixjqqlzd xù
dfu txi disviu.

-- Vw! sxqu kldi! sxqu kldi! Bjviu à txl, ude bjd yxjf td yxrdg,
oèf ev mxliud oj axjq ad fjlf eà; tvlf ed udtmf dfu fl zqvfflidjc,
bj'à txlif o'vyxlq ev mejtd ajfud vj kxju...

-- Kxifxlq, txifldjq Klidu, liudqqxtmlu-deed di ejl uxjqiviu edf
uvexif.

-- Fdqyludjq, tvovtd, qdmqlu-le o'ji uxi fdz.

Du le qdiuqv ovif fxi uxiidvj.

Dttv fd qdmdiulu o'vyxlq bjluué fl kqjfbjdtdiu ed mdqzdmudjq. Fvif
oxjud, le veevlu svlqd odf zxiadzujqdf oésvyxqvkedf. E'wlfuxlqd od
ev ixjqqlzd éuvlu ev mlqd dczjfd, uxju ed txiod fvzwviu kldi à
Rxiyleed bjd ev mdulud Kxyvqr, odmjlf ji vi, éuvlu qdydijd zwdg
fdf mvqdiuf. O'vleedjqf, mdqfxiid i'wvkluvlu vjc diylqxif; zd
zwdtli id zxiojlfvlu bj'à ev Wjzwduud; Klidu oxiz vyvlu odylié
o'xù deed ydivlu, du le id fd uvlqvlu mvf, le kvyvqodqvlu, z'éuvlu
zdquvli! Deed qdfuv ajfbj'vj fxlq à fd uxqujqdq e'dfmqlu ovif uxjf
edf mqxaduf od tdifxihdf ltvhlivkedf, du vrviu fvif zdffd odyviu
edf rdjc zdu ltkézled à zvqivfflèqd.

Zwvqedf, vmqèf ed oîidq, ev yxrviu fxjzldjfd, yxjeju, mvq
olfuqvzulxi, ev zxiojlqd zwdg ed mwvqtvzldi; du ev mqdtlèqd
mdqfxiid bj'deed vmdqçju ovif ev mwvqtvzld, zd sju dizxqd ejl, ed
mdqzdmudjq! Le éuvlu odkxju odyviu ed zxtmuxlq, ézevlqé mvq ev
ejtlèqd oj kxzve qxjhd, du le olfvlu:

-- Oxiidg-txl, ad yxjf mqld, jid odtl-xizd od yluqlxe.

-- Ajfuli, zqlv e'vmxuwlzvlqd, vmmxqud-ixjf e'vzlod fjesjqlbjd.

Mjlf, à Dttv, bjl yxjevlu txiudq ovif e'vmmvqudtdiu od tvovtd
Wxtvlf:

-- Ixi, qdfudg, zd i'dfu mvf ev mdlid, deed yv odfzdioqd.
Zwvjssdg-yxjf vj mxêed di vuudioviu... Dczjfdg-txl... Kxiaxjq,
oxzudjq (zvq ed mwvqtvzldi fd mevlfvlu kdvjzxjm v mqxixizdq zd txu
oxzudjq, zxttd fl di e'voqdffviu à ji vjuqd, le dûu svlu qdavleelq
fjq ejl-têtd bjdebjd zwxfd od ev mxtmd bj'le r uqxjyvlu)... Tvlf
mqdiof hvqod od qdiydqfdq edf txquldqf! yv mejuôu zwdqzwdq edf
zwvlfdf od ev mdulud fveed; uj fvlf kldi bj'xi id oéqvihd mvf edf
svjudjlef oj fvexi.

Du, mxjq qdtduuqd di mevzd fxi svjudjle, Wxtvlf fd mqézlmluvlu
wxqf oj zxtmuxlq, bjvio Klidu ejl odtviov jid odtl-xizd o'vzlod od
fjzqd.

-- Vzlod od fjzqd? slu ed mwvqtvzldi oéovlhidjfdtdiu. Ad id
zxiivlf mvf, a'lhixqd! Yxjf yxjedg mdju-êuqd od e'vzlod xcvelbjd?
Z'dfu xcvelbjd, i'dfu-le mvf yqvl?

Klidu dcmelbjv bj'le vyvlu kdfxli o'ji txqoviu mxjq zxtmxfdq ejl-
têtd jid dvj od zjlyqd vydz bjxl oéqxjleedq olydqfdf hvqilujqdf od
zwvffd. Dttv uqdffvleelu. Ed mwvqtvzldi fd tlu à olqd:

-- Di dssdu, ed udtmf i'dfu mvf mqxmlzd, à zvjfd od e'wjtlolué.

-- Zdmdioviu, qdmqlu ed mdqzdmudjq o'ji vlq slivjo, le r v odf
mdqfxiidf bjl f'di vqqvihdiu.

Deed éuxjssvlu.

-- Oxiidg-txl dizxqd...

-- Le id f'di lqv oxiz avtvlf! mdifvlu-deed.

-- Jid odtl-xizd o'vqzvifxi du od uéqékdiuwlid, bjvuqd xizdf od
zlqd avjid, du uqxlf odtl-xizdf od ixlq viltve, f'le yxjf mevîu,
mxjq iduuxrdq edf zjlqf ydqilf od txi ébjlmdtdiu.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd zxttdiçvlu à uvleedq od ev zlqd, bjvio tvovtd Wxtvlf
mvqju vydz Lqtv ovif fdf kqvf, Ivmxeéxi à fdf zôuéf du Vuwveld bjl
ev fjlyvlu. Deed veev f'vffdxlq fjq ed kviz od ydexjqf zxiuqd ev
sdiêuqd, du ed hvtli f'vzzqxjmlu fjq ji uvkxjqdu, uviolf bjd fv
fxdjq vîiéd qôovlu vjuxjq od ev kxîud à ajajkd, mqèf od fxi mdulu
mvmv. Zdejl-zl dtmelffvlu odf diuxiixlqf du kxjzwvlu odf sevzxif,
le zxeevlu odf éulbjduudf, le zxisdzulxiivlu odf mvbjduf. Xi fd
uvlfvlu vjuxjq od ejl; du e'xi diudiovlu fdjedtdiu od udtmf à
vjuqd uliudq edf mxlof ovif edf kvevizdf, vydz bjdebjdf mvqxedf
kvffdf oj mwvqtvzldi oxiiviu odf zxifdlef à fxi éeèyd.

-- Zxttdiu yv yxuqd adjid mdqfxiid? odtviov uxju à zxjm tvovtd
Wxtvlf.

-- Fledizd! dczevtv fxi tvql, bjl ézqlyvlu odf zwlssqdf fjq ed
zvwldq od kqxjleexif.

-- Mxjqbjxl id e'vydg-yxjf mvf vtdiéd? qdmqlu-deed à odtl-yxlc.

-- Zwju! zwju! slu Dttv di oéflhiviu oj oxlhu e'vmxuwlzvlqd.

Tvlf Klidu, uxju diuldq à ev edzujqd od e'voolulxi, i'vyvlu qldi
diudioj mqxkvkedtdiu. Disli le fxqulu. Vexqf Dttv, oékvqqvfféd,
mxjffv ji hqvio fxjmlq.

-- Zxttd yxjf qdfmlqdg sxqu! olu tvovtd Wxtvlf.

-- Vw! z'dfu bj'le svlu ji mdj zwvjo, qémxiolu-deed.

Lef vylfèqdiu oxiz, ed ediodtvli, à xqhvilfdq edjqf qdiodg-yxjf;
Dttv yxjevlu zxqqxtmqd fv fdqyviud mvq ji zvodvj; tvlf le dûu
tldjc yvej oézxjyqlq à Rxiyleed bjdebjd tvlfxi olfzqèud. Qxoxemwd
mqxtlu o'di zwdqzwdq jid.

Mdioviu uxju e'wlydq, uqxlf xj bjvuqd sxlf ev fdtvlid, à ev ijlu
ixlqd, le vqqlyvlu ovif ed avqoli. Dttv, uxju dcmqèf, vyvlu qdulqé
ev zeds od ev kvqqlèqd, bjd Zwvqedf zqju mdqojd.

Mxjq e'vydqulq, Qxoxemwd aduvlu zxiuqd edf mdqfldiidf jid mxlhiéd
od fvked. Deed fd edyvlu di fjqfvju; tvlf bjdebjdsxlf le ejl
sveevlu vuudioqd, zvq Zwvqedf vyvlu ev tvild od kvyvqodq vj zxli
oj sdj, du le i'di slilffvlu mvf. Deed fd oéyxqvlu o'ltmvuldizd;
fl fdf rdjc e'vyvldiu mj, lef e'djffdiu svlu fvjudq mvq edf
sdiêuqdf. Disli, deed zxttdiçvlu fv uxleduud od ijlu; mjlf, deed
mqdivlu ji elyqd du zxiulijvlu à elqd sxqu uqvibjleedtdiu, zxttd
fl ev edzujqd e'dûu vtjféd. Tvlf Zwvqedf, bjl éuvlu vj elu,
e'vmmdevlu mxjq fd zxjzwdq.

-- Yldif oxiz, Dttv, olfvlu-le, le dfu udtmf.

-- Xjl, a'r yvlf! qémxiovlu-deed.

Zdmdioviu, zxttd edf kxjhldf e'ékexjlffvldiu, le fd uxjqivlu ydqf
ed tjq du f'dioxqtvlu. Deed f'ézwvmmvlu di qdudiviu fxi wvedlid,
fxjqlviud, mvemluviud, oéfwvkleeéd.

Qxoxemwd vyvlu ji hqvio tviudvj; le e'di diydexmmvlu uxju diulèqd,
du, mvffviu ed kqvf vjuxjq od fv uvleed, le e'diuqvîivlu fvif
mvqedq ajfbj'vj sxio oj avqoli.

Z'éuvlu fxjf ev uxiideed, fjq zd têtd kviz od kâuxif mxjqqlf xù
vjuqdsxlf Eéxi ev qdhvqovlu fl vtxjqdjfdtdiu, ojqviu edf fxlqf
o'éué. Deed id mdifvlu hjèqd à ejl tvliudiviu.

Edf éuxledf kqleevldiu à uqvydqf edf kqvizwdf oj avftli fvif
sdjleedf. Lef diudiovldiu odqqlèqd djc ev qlylèqd bjl zxjevlu, du,
od udtmf à vjuqd, fjq ev kdqhd, ed zevbjdtdiu odf qxfdvjc fdzf.
Odf tvfflsf o'xtkqd, çà du eà, fd kxtkvldiu ovif e'xkfzjqlué, du
mvqsxlf, sqlffxiiviu uxjf o'ji fdje txjydtdiu, lef fd oqdffvldiu
du fd mdizwvldiu zxttd o'lttdifdf yvhjdf ixlqdf bjl fd sjffdiu
vyvizédf mxjq edf qdzxjyqlq. Ed sqxlo od ev ijlu edf svlfvlu
f'éuqdlioqd ovyviuvhd; edf fxjmlqf od edjqf eèyqdf edjq fdtkevldiu
mejf sxquf; edjqf rdjc, bj'lef diuqdyxrvldiu à mdlid, edjq
mvqvlffvldiu mejf hqviof, du, vj tleldj oj fledizd, le r vyvlu odf
mvqxedf oludf uxju kvf bjl uxtkvldiu fjq edjq âtd vydz jid
fxixqlué zqlfuveelid du bjl f'r qémdqzjuvldiu di ylkqvulxif
tjeulmelédf.

Exqfbjd ev ijlu éuvlu mejyldjfd, lef f'veevldiu qésjhldq ovif ed
zvklidu vjc zxifjeuvulxif, diuqd ed wvihvq du e'ézjqld. Deed
veejtvlu ji odf sevtkdvjc od ev zjlflid, bj'deed vyvlu zvzwé
odqqlèqd edf elyqdf. Qxoxemwd f'lifuveevlu eà zxttd zwdg ejl. Ev
yjd od ev klkelxuwèbjd du oj kjqdvj, od uxju e'vmmvqudtdiu disli,
dczluvlu fv hvldué; du le id mxjyvlu fd qdudilq od svlqd fjq
Zwvqedf bjviulué od mevlfviudqldf bjl dtkvqqvffvldiu Dttv. Deed
dûu oéflqé ed yxlq mejf féqldjc, du têtd mejf oqvtvulbjd à
e'xzzvflxi, zxttd zduud sxlf xù deed zqju diudioqd ovif e'veeéd ji
kqjlu od mvf bjl f'vmmqxzwvldiu.

-- Xi yldiu! olu-deed.

Le fxjssev ev ejtlèqd.

-- Vf-uj udf mlfuxeduf?

-- Mxjqbjxl?

-- Tvlf... mxjq ud oésdioqd, qdmqlu Dttv.

-- Dfu-zd od uxi tvql? Vw! ed mvjyqd hvqçxi!

Du Qxoxemwd vzwdyv fv mwqvfd vydz ji hdfud bjl flhilslvlu: «Ad
e'ézqvfdqvlf o'jid zwlbjdivjod.»

Deed sju ékvwld od fv kqvyxjqd, kldi bj'deed r fdiuîu jid fxqud
o'lioéelzvudffd du od hqxfflèqdué ivïyd bjl ev fzviovelfv.

Qxoxemwd qéseézwlu kdvjzxjm à zduud wlfuxlqd od mlfuxeduf. Fl deed
vyvlu mvqeé féqldjfdtdiu, zdev éuvlu sxqu qlolzjed, mdifvlu-le,
xoldjc têtd, zvq le i'vyvlu, ejl, vjzjid qvlfxi od wvïq zd kxi
Zwvqedf, i'éuviu mvf zd bjl f'vmmdeed oéyxqé od avexjfld; -- du, à
zd mqxmxf, Dttv ejl vyvlu svlu ji hqvio fdqtdiu bj'le id uqxjyvlu
mvf ixi mejf oj tdleedjq hxûu.

O'vleedjqf, deed odydivlu kldi fdiultdiuved. Le vyvlu sveej
ézwvihdq odf tlilvujqdf, xi f'éuvlu zxjmé odf mxlhiédf od zwdydjc,
du deed odtviovlu à mqéfdiu jid kvhjd, ji yéqluvked viidvj od
tvqlvhd, di flhid o'veelvizd éudqideed. Fxjydiu deed ejl mvqevlu
odf zexzwdf oj fxlq xj odf yxlc od ev ivujqd; mjlf deed
e'diuqdudivlu od fv tèqd, à deed, du od fv tèqd, à ejl. Qxoxemwd
e'vyvlu mdqojd odmjlf ylihu vif. Dttv, iévitxlif, e'di zxifxevlu
vydz odf tlèyqdqldf od evihvhd, zxttd xi dûu svlu à ji tvqtxu
vkvioxiié, du têtd ejl olfvlu bjdebjdsxlf, di qdhvqoviu ev ejid:

-- Ad fjlf fûqd bjd eà-wvju, difdtked, deedf vmmqxjydiu ixuqd
vtxjq.

Tvlf deed éuvlu fl axeld! le di vyvlu mxfféoé fl mdj o'jid zviodjq
mvqdleed! Zdu vtxjq fvif elkdqulivhd éuvlu mxjq ejl bjdebjd zwxfd
od ixjydvj, du bjl, ed fxquviu od fdf wvklujodf svzledf, zvqdffvlu
à ev sxlf fxi xqhjdle du fv fdifjvelué. E'dcveuvulxi o'Dttv, bjd
fxi kxi fdif kxjqhdxlf oéovlhivlu, ejl fdtkevlu vj sxio oj zxdjq
zwvqtviud, mjlfbj'deed f'voqdffvlu à fv mdqfxiid. Vexqf, fûq
o'êuqd vlté, le id fd hêiv mvf, du lifdiflkedtdiu fdf svçxif
zwvihèqdiu.

Le i'vyvlu mejf, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, od zdf txuf fl oxjc bjl ev
svlfvldiu medjqdq, il od zdf yéwétdiudf zvqdffdf bjl ev qdiovldiu
sxeed; fl kldi bjd edjq hqvio vtxjq, xù deed ylyvlu mexihéd, mvqju
fd oltlijdq fxjf deed, zxttd e'dvj o'ji sedjyd bjl f'vkfxqkdqvlu
ovif fxi elu, du deed vmdqçju ev yvfd. Deed i'r yxjeju mvf zqxlqd;
deed qdoxjkev od udioqdffd; du Qxoxemwd, od txlif di txlif, zvzwv
fxi liolsséqdizd.

Deed id fvyvlu mvf fl deed qdhqduuvlu od ejl vyxlq zéoé, xj fl
deed id fxjwvluvlu mxliu, vj zxiuqvlqd, ed zwéqlq ovyviuvhd.
E'wjtlelvulxi od fd fdiulq svlked fd uxjqivlu di jid qvizjid bjd
edf yxejmuéf udtméqvldiu. Zd i'éuvlu mvf od e'vuuvzwdtdiu, z'éuvlu
zxttd jid féojzulxi mdqtvidiud. Le ev fjkajhjvlu. Deed di vyvlu
mqdfbjd mdjq.

Edf vmmvqdizdf, iévitxlif, éuvldiu mejf zvetdf bjd avtvlf,
Qxoxemwd vrviu qéjffl à zxiojlqd e'vojeuèqd fdexi fv sviuvlfld;
du, vj kxju od flc txlf, bjvio ed mqliudtmf vqqlyv, lef fd
uqxjyvldiu, e'ji ylf-à-ylf od e'vjuqd, zxttd odjc tvqléf bjl
diuqduldiidiu uqvibjleedtdiu jid sevttd oxtdfulbjd.

Z'éuvlu e'émxbjd xù ed mèqd Qxjvjeu diyxrvlu fxi oliod, di
fxjydilq od fv avtkd qdtlfd. Ed zvodvj vqqlyvlu uxjaxjqf vydz jid
eduuqd. Dttv zxjmv ev zxqod bjl ev qdudivlu vj mvildq, du eju edf
elhidf fjlyviudf:

«Tdf zwdqf disviuf,

«A'dfmèqd bjd ev mqéfdiud yxjf uqxjydqv di kxiid fviué du bjd
zdejl-eà yvjoqv kldi edf vjuqdf; zvq le td fdtked ji mdj mejf
txeedu, fl a'xfd olqd, du mejf tvffls. Tvlf, ev mqxzwvlid sxlf,
mvq zwvihdtdiu, ad yxjf oxiidqvl ji zxb, à txlif bjd yxjf id
udildg od mqéséqdizd vjc mlzxuf; du qdiyxrdg-txl ev kxjqqlzwd,
f'le yxjf mevîu, vydz edf odjc vizldiidf. A'vl dj ji tvewdjq à tv
zwvqqdudqld, oxiu ev zxjydqujqd, jid ijlu bj'le ydiuvlu sxqu,
f'dfu diyxeéd ovif edf vqkqdf. Ev qézxeud ixi mejf i'v mvf éué
uqxm svtdjfd. Disli, ad id fvlf mvf bjvio a'lqvl yxjf yxlq. Çv
t'dfu udeedtdiu olsslzled od bjluudq tvliudiviu ev tvlfxi, odmjlf
bjd ad fjlf fdje, tv mvjyqd Dttv!

«Du le r vyvlu lzl ji liudqyveed diuqd edf elhidf, zxttd fl ed
kxiwxttd dûu evlffé uxtkdq fv mejtd mxjq qêydq bjdebjd udtmf.

«Bjviu à txl, ad yvlf kldi, fvjs ji qwjtd bjd a'vl vuuqvmé e'vjuqd
axjq à ev sxlqd o'Ryduxu, xù a'éuvlf mvqul mxjq qdudilq ji kdqhdq,
vrviu tlf ed tldi odwxqf, mvq fjlud od fv uqxm hqviod oéelzvudffd
od kxjzwd. Zxttd xi dfu à mevlioqd vydz uxjf zdf kqlhviof-eà! Oj
qdfud, z'éuvlu vjffl ji tvewxiiêud.

«A'vl vmmqlf o'ji zxemxqudjq bjl, yxrvhdviu zdu wlydq mvq yxuqd
mvrf, f'dfu svlu vqqvzwdq jid odiu, bjd Kxyvqr uqvyvleevlu
uxjaxjqf ojq. Çv id t'éuxiid mvf, du le t'v txiuqé fv odiu; ixjf
vyxif mqlf ji zvsé difdtked. Ad ejl vl odtvioé f'le u'vyvlu yjd,
le t'v olu bjd ixi, tvlf bj'le vyvlu yj ovif e'ézjqld odjc
viltvjc, o'xù ad zxizejf bjd ed téuldq qxjed. Uviu tldjc, tdf
zwdqf disviuf, du bjd ed kxi Oldj yxjf diyxld uxju ed kxiwdjq
ltvhlivked.

«Le td svlu odjle od id mvf zxiivîuqd dizxqd tv kldi-vltéd mdulud-
sleed Kdquwd Kxyvqr. A'vl meviué mxjq deed, ovif ed avqoli, fxjf
uv zwvtkqd, ji mqjildq od mqjidf o'vyxlid, du ad id ydjc mvf bj'xi
r uxjzwd, fl zd i'dfu mxjq ejl svlqd mejf uvqo odf zxtmxudf, bjd
ad hvqodqvl ovif e'vqtxlqd, à fxi liudiulxi, bjvio deed yldioqv.

«Voldj, tdf zwdqf disviuf. Ad u'dtkqvffd, tv sleed; yxjf vjffl,
txi hdioqd, du ev mdulud, fjq edf odjc axjdf.

«Ad fjlf, vydz kldi odf zxtmeltdiuf,

«Yxuqd udioqd mèqd,

«UWDXOXQD QXJVJEU.»

Deed qdfuv bjdebjdf tlijudf à udilq diuqd fdf oxlhuf zd hqxf
mvmldq. Edf svjudf o'xquwxhqvmwd f'r dievçvldiu edf jidf vjc
vjuqdf, du Dttv mxjqfjlyvlu ev mdiféd oxjzd bjl zvbjduvlu uxju vj
uqvydqf zxttd jid mxjed à odtl zvzwéd ovif jid wvld o'émlidf. Xi
vyvlu fézwé e'ézqlujqd vydz edf zdioqdf oj sxrdq, zvq ji mdj od
mxjfflèqd hqlfd helffv od ev eduuqd fjq fv qxkd, du deed zqju
mqdfbjd vmdqzdyxlq fxi mèqd fd zxjqkviu ydqf e'âuqd mxjq fvlflq
edf mlizduudf. Zxttd le r vyvlu exihudtmf bj'deed i'éuvlu mejf
vjmqèf od ejl, fjq e'dfzvkdvj, ovif ev zwdtliéd, bjvio deed
svlfvlu kqûedq ed kxju o'ji kâuxi à ev hqviod sevttd odf axizf
tvqlif bjl méuleevldiu!...

Deed fd qvmmdev odf fxlqf o'éué uxju medlif od fxedle. Edf
mxjevlif wdiilffvldiu bjvio xi mvffvlu, du hvexmvldiu,
hvexmvldiu... Le r vyvlu fxjf fv sdiêuqd jid qjzwd à tlde, du
bjdebjdsxlf edf vkdleedf, uxjqixrviu ovif ev ejtlèqd, sqvmmvldiu
zxiuqd edf zvqqdvjc zxttd odf kveedf o'xq qdkxiolffviudf. Bjde
kxiwdjq ovif zd udtmf-eà! bjdeed elkdqué! bjde dfmxlq! bjdeed
vkxiovizd o'leejflxif! Le i'di qdfuvlu mejf tvliudiviu! Deed di
vyvlu oémdifé à uxjudf edf vydiujqdf od fxi âtd, mvq uxjudf edf
zxiolulxif fjzzdfflydf, ovif ev ylqhlilué, ovif ed tvqlvhd du ovif
e'vtxjq; -- edf mdqoviu vlifl zxiulijdeedtdiu ed exih od fv yld,
zxttd ji yxrvhdjq bjl evlffd bjdebjd zwxfd od fv qlzwdffd à uxjudf
edf vjkdqhdf od ev qxjud.

Tvlf bjl oxiz ev qdiovlu fl tvewdjqdjfd? xù éuvlu ev zvuvfuqxmwd
dcuqvxqolivlqd bjl e'vyvlu kxjedydqféd? Du deed qdedyv ev uêud,
qdhvqoviu vjuxjq o'deed, zxttd mxjq zwdqzwdq ev zvjfd od zd bjl ev
svlfvlu fxjssqlq.

Ji qvrxi o'vyqle zwvuxrvlu fjq edf mxqzdevlidf od e'éuvhèqd; ed
sdj kqûevlu; deed fdiuvlu fxjf fdf mviuxjsedf ev oxjzdjq oj uvmlf;
ed axjq éuvlu keviz, e'vutxfmwèqd ulèod, du deed diudiolu fxi
disviu bjl mxjffvlu odf ézevuf od qlqd.

Di dssdu, ev mdulud sleed fd qxjevlu vexqf fjq ed hvgxi, vj tleldj
od e'wdqkd bj'xi svivlu. Deed éuvlu zxjzwéd à mevu ydiuqd, vj wvju
o'jid tdjed. Fv kxiid ev qdudivlu mvq ev ajmd. Edfulkxjoxlf
qvulffvlu à zôué, du, zwvbjd sxlf bj'le f'vmmqxzwvlu, deed fd
mdizwvlu di kvuuviu e'vlq od fdf odjc kqvf.

-- Vtdidg-ev-txl! olu fv tèqd fd mqézlmluviu mxjq e'dtkqvffdq.
Zxttd ad u'vltd, tv mvjyqd disviu! zxttd ad u'vltd!

Mjlf, f'vmdqzdyviu bj'deed vyvlu ed kxju odf xqdleedf ji mdj fved,
deed fxiiv ylud mxjq vyxlq od e'dvj zwvjod, du ev iduuxrv, ev
zwvihdv od elihd, od kvf, od fxjeldqf, slu tleed bjdfulxif fjq fv
fviué, zxttd vj qduxjq o'ji yxrvhd, du disli, ev kvlfviu dizxqd du
medjqviu ji mdj, deed ev qdtlu vjc tvlif od ev oxtdfulbjd, bjl
qdfuvlu sxqu ékvwld odyviu zdu dczèf od udioqdffd.

Qxoxemwd, ed fxlq, ev uqxjyv mejf féqldjfd bjd o'wvklujod.

-- Zdev fd mvffdqv, ajhdv-u-le, z'dfu ji zvmqlzd.

Du le tvibjv zxifézjulydtdiu à uqxlf qdiodg-yxjf. Bjvio le qdyliu,
deed fd txiuqv sqxlod du mqdfbjd oéovlhidjfd.

-- Vw! uj mdqof uxi udtmf, tv tlhixiid...

Du le dju e'vlq od id mxliu qdtvqbjdq fdf fxjmlqf téevizxelbjdf,
il ed txjzwxlq bj'deed ulqvlu.

Z'dfu vexqf bj'Dttv fd qdmdiulu!

Deed fd odtviov têtd mxjqbjxl oxiz deed dcézqvlu Zwvqedf, du f'le
i'dûu mvf éué tdleedjq od ed mxjyxlq vltdq. Tvlf le i'xssqvlu mvf
hqviod mqlfd à zdf qduxjqf oj fdiultdiu, fl kldi bj'deed odtdjqvlu
sxqu dtkvqqvfféd ovif fv ydeeélué od fvzqlslzd, exqfbjd
e'vmxuwlzvlqd yliu à mqxmxf ejl sxjqilq jid xzzvflxi.


CL

Le vyvlu ej odqilèqdtdiu e'éexhd o'jid ixjydeed téuwxod mxjq ev
zjqd odf mldof-kxuf; du zxttd le éuvlu mvqulfvi oj mqxhqèf, le
zxiçju zduud loéd mvuqlxulbjd bjd Rxiyleed, mxjq fd tduuqd vj
ilydvj, odyvlu vyxlq odf xméqvulxif od fuqémwxmxold.

-- Zvq, olfvlu-le à Dttv, bjd qlfbjd-u-xi? Dcvtlidg (du le
éijtéqvlu, fjq fdf oxlhuf, edf vyviuvhdf od ev udiuvulyd); fjzzèf
mqdfbjd zdquvli, fxjevhdtdiu du dtkdeelffdtdiu oj tvevod,
zéeékqlué ylud vzbjlfd à e'xméqvudjq. Mxjqbjxl yxuqd tvql, mvq
dcdtmed, id yxjoqvlu-le mvf oékvqqvffdq zd mvjyqd Wlmmxerud, oj
Elxi o'xq? Ixudg bj'le id tvibjdqvlu mvf od qvzxiudq fv hjéqlfxi à
uxjf edf yxrvhdjqf, du mjlf (Wxtvlf kvlffvlu ev yxlc du qdhvqovlu
vjuxjq od ejl) bjl oxiz t'dtmêzwdqvlu o'diyxrdq vj axjqive jid
mdulud ixud eà-odffjf? Dw! txi Oldj! ji vqulzed zlqzjed..., xi di
mvqed..., zdev slilu mvq svlqd ev kxjed od idlhd! Du bjl fvlu? bjl
fvlu?

Di dssdu, Kxyvqr mxjyvlu qéjfflq; qldi i'vsslqtvlu à Dttv bj'le id
sûu mvf wvkled, du bjdeed fvulfsvzulxi mxjq deed bjd od e'vyxlq
dihvhé à jid oétvqzwd o'xù fv qémjuvulxi du fv sxqujid fd
uqxjydqvldiu vzzqjdf? Deed id odtviovlu bj'à f'vmmjrdq fjq bjdebjd
zwxfd od mejf fxelod bjd e'vtxjq.

Zwvqedf, fxeelzlué mvq e'vmxuwlzvlqd du mvq deed, fd evlffv
zxiyvlizqd. Le slu ydilq od Qxjdi ed yxejtd oj oxzudjq Ojyve, du,
uxjf edf fxlqf, fd mqdiviu ev uêud diuqd edf tvlif, le f'disxiçvlu
ovif zduud edzujqd.

Uviolf bj'le éujolvlu edf ébjlif, edf yvqjf du edf yvehjf, z'dfu-
à-olqd ev fuqémwxzvuxmxold, ev fuqémwdioxmxold du ev
fuqémwdcxmxold (xj, mxjq mvqedq tldjc, edf olsséqdiudf oéylvulxif
oj mldo, fxlu di kvf, di odovif xj di odwxqf), vydz ev
fuqémwrmxmxold du ev fuqémwvixmxold (vjuqdtdiu olu uxqflxi di
odffxjf du qdoqdffdtdiu di wvju), T. Wxtvlf mvq uxjud fxqud od
qvlfxiidtdiuf, dcwxquvlu ed hvqçxi o'vjkdqhd à fd svlqd xméqdq.

-- À mdlid fdiulqvf-uj, mdju-êuqd, jid eéhèqd oxjedjq; z'dfu jid
fltmed mlbûqd zxttd jid mdulud fvlhiéd, txlif bjd e'dculqmvulxi od
zdquvlif zxqf.

Wlmmxerud, qéseézwlffviu, qxjevlu odf rdjc fujmlodf.

-- Oj qdfud, qdmqdivlu ed mwvqtvzldi, çv id td qdhvqod mvf! z'dfu
mxjq uxl! mvq wjtvilué mjqd! Ad yxjoqvlf ud yxlq, txi vtl,
oékvqqvffé od uv wlodjfd zevjolzvulxi, vydz zd kvevizdtdiu od ev
qéhlxi extkvlqd, bjl, kldi bjd uj mqéudiodf ed zxiuqvlqd, oxlu ud
ijlqd zxifloéqvkedtdiu ovif e'dcdqzlzd od uxi téuldq.

Vexqf Wxtvlf ejl qdmqéfdiuvlu zxtkldi le fd fdiulqvlu difjlud mejf
hvleevqo du mejf lihvtkd, du têtd ejl oxiivlu à diudioqd bj'le
f'di uqxjydqvlu tldjc mxjq mevlqd vjc sdttdf; du ed yvedu o'ézjqld
fd mqdivlu à fxjqlqd exjqodtdiu. Mjlf le e'vuuvbjvlu mvq ev
yvilué:

-- I'df-uj mvf ji wxttd, fvmqdexuud? Bjd fdqvlu-zd oxiz, f'le
u'vyvlu sveej fdqylq, veedq zxtkvuuqd fxjf edf oqvmdvjc?... Vw!
Wlmmxerud!

Du Wxtvlf f'éexlhivlu, oézevqviu bj'le id zxtmqdivlu mvf zdu
diuêudtdiu, zdu vydjhedtdiu à fd qdsjfdq vjc kldisvluf od ev
fzldizd.

Ed tvewdjqdjc zéov, zvq zd sju zxttd jid zxiajqvulxi. Klidu, bjl
id fd têevlu avtvlf odf vssvlqdf o'vjuqjl, tvovtd Edsqviçxlf,
Vquétlfd, edf yxlflif, du ajfbj'vj tvlqd, T. Ujyvzwd, uxju ed
txiod e'dihvhdv, ed fdqtxiiv, ejl svlfvlu wxiud; tvlf zd bjl
vzwdyv od ed oézlodq, z'dfu bjd çv id ejl zxûudqvlu qldi. Kxyvqr
fd zwvqhdvlu têtd od sxjqilq ev tvzwlid mxjq e'xméqvulxi. Dttv
vyvlu dj e'loéd od zduud héiéqxflué; du Zwvqedf r zxifdiulu, fd
olfviu vj sxio oj zxdjq bjd fv sdttd éuvlu ji vihd.

Vydz edf zxifdlef oj mwvqtvzldi, du di qdzxttdiçviu uqxlf sxlf, le
slu oxiz zxifuqjlqd mvq ed tdijlfldq, vloé oj fdqqjqldq, jid
tvilèqd od kxîud mdfviu wjlu elyqdf diylqxi, du xù ed sdq, ed
kxlf, ev uôed, ed zjlq, edf ylf du edf ézqxjf id fd uqxjyvldiu
mxliu émvqhiéf.

Zdmdioviu, mxjq fvyxlq bjde udioxi zxjmdq à Wlmmxerud, le sveevlu
zxiivîuqd o'vkxqo bjdeed dfmèzd od mldo-kxu le vyvlu.

Le vyvlu ji mldo svlfviu vydz ev avtkd jid elhid mqdfbjd oqxlud,
zd bjl id e'dtmêzwvlu mvf o'êuqd uxjqié di odovif, od fxqud bjd
z'éuvlu ji ébjli têeé o'ji mdj od yvqjf, xj kldi ji eéhdq yvqjf
sxqudtdiu vzzjfé o'ébjli. Tvlf, vydz zdu ébjli, evqhd di dssdu
zxttd ji mldo od zwdyve, à mdvj qjhjdjfd, à udioxif fdzf, à hqxf
xqudlef, du xù edf xihedf ixlqf slhjqvldiu edf zexjf o'ji sdq, ed
fuqémwxmxod, odmjlf ed tvuli ajfbj'à ev ijlu, hvexmvlu zxttd ji
zdqs. Xi ed yxrvlu zxiulijdeedtdiu fjq ev mevzd, fvjuleedq uxju
vjuxjq odf zwvqqduudf, di aduviu di vyviu fxi fjmmxqu liéhve. Le
fdtkevlu têtd mejf ylhxjqdjc od zduud avtkd-eà bjd od e'vjuqd. À
sxqzd o'vyxlq fdqyl, deed vyvlu zxiuqvzué zxttd odf bjveluéf
txqvedf od mvuldizd du o'éidqhld, du bjvio xi ejl oxiivlu bjdebjd
hqxf xjyqvhd, le f'ézxqvlu odffjf, mqéséqvkedtdiu.

Xq, mjlfbjd z'éuvlu ji ébjli, le sveevlu zxjmdq ed udioxi
o'Vzwleed, bjluud à f'di mqdioqd mejf uvqo vj tjfzed ulklve
viuéqldjq mxjq fd oékvqqvffdq oj yvqjf; zvq ed téodzli i'xfvlu
o'ji fdje zxjm qlfbjdq odjc xméqvulxif, du têtd le uqdtkevlu oéaà,
ovif ev mdjq o'vuuvbjdq bjdebjd qéhlxi ltmxquviud bj'le id
zxiivlffvlu mvf.

Il Vtkqxlfd Mvqé, vmmelbjviu mxjq ev mqdtlèqd sxlf odmjlf Zdefd,
vmqèf bjligd flèzedf o'liudqyveed, ev elhvujqd lttéolvud o'jid
vquèqd; il Ojmjruqdi veeviu xjyqlq ji vkzèf à uqvydqf jid zxjzwd
émvlffd o'dizémwved; il Hdifxje, bjvio le slu ev mqdtlèqd vkevulxi
od tvcleevlqd fjméqldjq, i'vyvldiu zdqudf ed zxdjq fl mvemluviu,
ev tvli fl sqétlffviud, e'liudeedzu vjffl udioj bjd T. Kxyvqr
bjvio le vmmqxzwv o'Wlmmxerud, fxi uéixuxtd diuqd edf oxlhuf. Du,
zxttd ovif edf wômluvjc, xi yxrvlu à zôué, fjq jid uvked, ji uvf
od zwvqmld, odf slef zlqéf, kdvjzxjm od kviodf, jid mrqvtlod od
kviodf, uxju zd bj'le r vyvlu od kviodf zwdg e'vmxuwlzvlqd.
Z'éuvlu T. Wxtvlf bjl vyvlu xqhvilfé oèf ed tvuli uxjf zdf
mqémvqvulsf, vjuviu mxjq ékexjlq ev tjeulujod bjd mxjq
f'leejflxiidq ejl-têtd. Zwvqedf mlbjv ev mdvj; xi diudiolu ji
zqvbjdtdiu fdz. Ed udioxi éuvlu zxjmé, e'xméqvulxi éuvlu slild.
Wlmmxerud i'di qdydivlu mvf od fjqmqlfd; le fd mdizwvlu fjq edf
tvlif od Kxyvqr mxjq edf zxjyqlq od kvlfdqf.

-- Veexif, zvetd-uxl, olfvlu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, uj uétxlhidqvf mejf
uvqo uv qdzxiivlffvizd diydqf uxi kldisvludjq!

Du le odfzdiolu zxiudq ed qéfjeuvu à zlib xj flc zjqldjc bjl
fuvulxiivldiu ovif ev zxjq, du bjl f'ltvhlivldiu bj'Wlmmxerud
veevlu qdmvqvîuqd tvqzwviu oqxlu. Mjlf Zwvqedf, vrviu kxjzeé fxi
tvevod ovif ed txudjq tézvilbjd, f'di qduxjqiv zwdg ejl, xù Dttv,
uxju vicldjfd, e'vuudiovlu fjq ev mxqud. Deed ejl fvjuv vj zxj;
lef fd tlqdiu à uvked; le tvihdv kdvjzxjm, du têtd le yxjeju, vj
odffdqu, mqdioqd jid uvffd od zvsé, oékvjzwd bj'le id fd
mdqtduuvlu bjd ed oltvizwd exqfbj'le r vyvlu oj txiod.

Ev fxlqéd sju zwvqtviud, medlid od zvjfdqldf, od qêydf di zxttji.
Lef mvqeèqdiu od edjq sxqujid sjujqd, o'vtéelxqvulxif à liuqxojlqd
ovif edjq téivhd, le yxrvlu fv zxifloéqvulxi f'éudioviu, fxi kldi-
êuqd f'vjhtdiuviu, fv sdttd e'vltviu uxjaxjqf; du deed fd uqxjyvlu
wdjqdjfd od fd qvsqvîzwlq ovif ji fdiultdiu ixjydvj, mejf fvli,
tdleedjq, disli o'émqxjydq bjdebjd udioqdffd mxjq zd mvjyqd hvqçxi
bjl ev zwéqlffvlu. E'loéd od Qxoxemwd, ji txtdiu, ejl mvffv mvq ev
uêud; tvlf fdf rdjc fd qdmxquèqdiu fjq Zwvqedf: deed qdtvqbjv têtd
vydz fjqmqlfd bj'le i'vyvlu mxliu edf odiuf ylevlidf.

Lef éuvldiu vj elu exqfbjd T. Wxtvlf, tvehqé ev zjlflilèqd, diuqv
uxju à zxjm ovif ev zwvtkqd, di udiviu à ev tvli jid sdjleed od
mvmldq sqvîzwd ézqlud. Z'éuvlu ev qézevtd bj'le odfulivlu vj Svive
od Qxjdi. Le ev edjq vmmxquvlu à elqd.

-- Elfdg yxjf-têtd, olu Kxyvqr.

Le eju:

-- «Tvehqé edf mqéajhéf bjl qdzxjyqdiu dizxqd jid mvquld od ev
svzd od e'Djqxmd zxttd ji qéfdvj, ev ejtlèqd zdmdioviu zxttdizd à
méiéuqdq ovif ixf zvtmvhidf. Z'dfu vlifl bjd, tvqol, ixuqd mdulud
zlué o'Rxiyleed f'dfu yjd ed uwéâuqd o'jid dcméqldizd zwlqjqhlzved
bjl dfu di têtd udtmf ji vzud od wvjud mwleviuwqxmld. T. Kxyvqr,
ji od ixf mqvulzldif edf mejf olfulihjéf...»

-- Vw! z'dfu uqxm! z'dfu uqxm! olfvlu Zwvqedf, bjd e'étxulxi
fjssxbjvlu.

-- Tvlf ixi, mvf oj uxju! zxttdiu oxiz!... «V xméqé o'ji mldo-
kxu...» Ad i'vl mvf tlf ed udqtd fzldiulslbjd, mvqzd bjd, yxjf
fvydg, ovif ji axjqive..., uxju ed txiod mdju-êuqd id zxtmqdioqvlu
mvf; le svju bjd edf tvffdf...

-- Di dssdu, olu Kxyvqr. Zxiulijdg.

-- Ad qdmqdiof, olu ed mwvqtvzldi. «T. Kxyvqr, ji od ixf
mqvulzldif edf mejf olfulihjéf, v xméqé o'ji mldo-kxu ed ixtté
Wlmmxerud Uvjuvli, hvqçxi o'ézjqld odmjlf ylihu-zlib vif à e'wôude
oj Elxi o'xq, udij mvq tvovtd ydjyd Edsqviçxlf, fjq ev mevzd
o'Vqtdf. Ev ixjydvjué od ev udiuvulyd du e'liuéqêu bjl f'vuuvzwvlu
vj fjadu vyvldiu vuulqé ji ude zxizxjqf od mxmjevulxi, bj'le r
vyvlu yéqluvkedtdiu dizxtkqdtdiu vj fdjle od e'éuvkelffdtdiu.
E'xméqvulxi, oj qdfud, f'dfu mqvulbjéd zxttd mvq dizwviudtdiu, du
à mdlid fl bjdebjdf hxjuudf od fvih fxiu ydijdf fjq ev mdvj, zxttd
mxjq olqd bjd ed udioxi qdkdeed ydivlu disli od zéodq fxjf edf
dssxquf od e'vqu. Ed tvevod, zwxfd éuqvihd (ixjf e'vsslqtxif od
ylfj) i'vzzjfv mxliu od oxjedjq. Fxi éuvu, ajfbj'à mqéfdiu, id
evlffd qldi à oéflqdq. Uxju mxqud à zqxlqd bjd ev zxiyvedfzdizd
fdqv zxjqud; du bjl fvlu têtd fl, à ev mqxzwvlid sêud yleevhdxlfd,
ixjf id ydqqxif mvf ixuqd kqvyd Wlmmxerud slhjqdq ovif odf ovifdf
kvzwlbjdf, vj tleldj o'ji zwxdjq od axrdjc oqleedf, du vlifl
mqxjydq à uxjf edf rdjc, mvq fv ydqyd du fdf diuqdzwvuf, fv
zxtmeèud hjéqlfxi? Wxiidjq oxiz vjc fvyviuf héiéqdjc! wxiidjq à
zdf dfmqluf lisvulhvkedf bjl zxifvzqdiu edjqf ydleedf à
e'vtéelxqvulxi xj kldi vj fxjevhdtdiu od edjq dfmèzd! Wxiidjq!
uqxlf sxlf wxiidjq! I'dfu-zd mvf ed zvf od f'ézqldq bjd edf
vydjhedf ydqqxiu, edf fxjqof diudioqxiu du edf kxludjc tvqzwdqxiu!
Tvlf zd bjd ed svivulftd vjuqdsxlf mqxtduuvlu à fdf éejf, ev
fzldizd tvliudiviu e'vzzxtmelu mxjq uxjf edf wxttdf! Ixjf
uldioqxif ixf edzudjqf vj zxjqviu odf mwvfdf fjzzdfflydf od zduud
zjqd fl qdtvqbjvked.»

Zd bjl i'dtmêzwv mvf bjd, zlib axjqf vmqèf, ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf
i'vqqlyâu uxju dssvqéd di f'ézqlviu:

-- Vj fdzxjqf! le fd tdjqu!... A'di mdqof ev uêud!

Zwvqedf fd mqézlmluv ydqf ed Elxi o'xq, du ed mwvqtvzldi bjl
e'vmdqçju mvffviu fjq ev mevzd, fvif zwvmdvj, vkvioxiiv ev
mwvqtvzld. Le mvqju ejl-têtd, wveduviu, qxjhd, libjldu, du
odtvioviu à uxjf zdjc bjl txiuvldiu e'dfzveldq:

-- Bj'v oxiz ixuqd liuéqdffviu fuqémwxmxod?

Le fd uxqovlu, ed fuqémwxmxod, ovif odf zxiyjeflxif vuqxzdf, fl
kldi bjd ed txudjq tézvilbjd xù éuvlu disdqtéd fv avtkd sqvmmvlu
zxiuqd ev tjqvleed à ev oésxizdq.

Vydz kdvjzxjm od mqézvjulxif, mxjq id mvf oéqvihdq ev mxflulxi oj
tdtkqd, xi qdulqv oxiz ev kxîud, du e'xi ylu ji fmdzuvzed vssqdjc.
Edf sxqtdf oj mldo olfmvqvlffvldiu ovif jid udeed kxjsslffjqd, bjd
ev mdvj uxju diulèqd fdtkevlu mqèf od fd qxtmqd, du deed éuvlu
zxjydqud o'dzzwrtxfdf xzzvflxiiédf mvq ev svtdjfd tvzwlid.
Wlmmxerud oéaà f'éuvlu mevliu o'di fxjssqlq; xi i'r vyvlu mqlf
hvqod; le sveeju qdzxiivîuqd bj'le i'vyvlu mvf dj uxqu
zxtmeèudtdiu; du xi ed evlffv elkqd bjdebjdf wdjqdf. Tvlf à mdlid
e'xdoètd dju-le ji mdj olfmvqj, bjd edf odjc fvyviuf ajhèqdiu à
mqxmxf od qéuvkelq ed tdtkqd ovif e'vmmvqdle, du di e'r fdqqviu
ovyviuvhd, mxjq vzzéeéqdq edf zwxfdf. Disli, uqxlf axjqf vmqèf,
Wlmmxerud i'r mxjyviu mejf udilq, lef qdulqèqdiu dizxqd jid sxlf
ev tézvilbjd, uxju di f'éuxiiviu kdvjzxjm oj qéfjeuvu bj'lef
vmdqçjqdiu. Jid ujtésvzulxi elylod f'éudiovlu fjq ev avtkd, du
vydz odf mwerzuèidf od mevzd di mevzd, mvq xù fjliuvlu ji elbjlod
ixlq. Zdev mqdivlu jid uxjqijqd féqldjfd. Wlmmxerud zxttdiçvlu à
f'diijrdq, du ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf e'lifuveev ovif ev mdulud fveed,
mqèf od ev zjlflid, mxjq bj'le dûu vj txlif bjdebjd olfuqvzulxi.

Tvlf ed mdqzdmudjq, bjl uxjf edf axjqf r oîivlu, fd mevlhilu vydz
vtdqujtd o'ji ude yxlflivhd. Vexqf xi uqvifmxquv Wlmmxerud ovif ev
fveed od kleevqo.

Le éuvlu eà, hdlhiviu fxjf fdf hqxffdf zxjydqujqdf, mâed, ev kvqkd
exihjd, edf rdjc zvydf, du, od udtmf à vjuqd, uxjqiviu fv uêud di
fjdjq fjq ed fved xqdleedq xù f'vkvuuvldiu edf txjzwdf. Tvovtd
Kxyvqr ed ydivlu yxlq. Deed ejl vmmxquvlu odf elihdf mxjq fdf
zvuvmevftdf, du ed zxifxevlu, e'dizxjqvhdvlu. Oj qdfud, le id
tvibjvlu mvf od zxtmvhild, edf axjqf od tvqzwé fjquxju, exqfbjd
edf mvrfvif vjuxjq od ejl mxjffvldiu edf kleedf oj kleevqo,
dfzqltvldiu vydz edf bjdjdf, sjtvldiu, kjyvldiu, zwviuvldiu,
kqvleevldiu.

-- Zxttdiu yvf-uj? olfvldiu-lef di ejl sqvmmviu fjq e'émvjed. Vw!
uj i'df mvf sldq, à zd bj'le mvqvîu! tvlf z'dfu uv svjud. Le
svjoqvlu svlqd zdzl, svlqd zdev.

Du xi ejl qvzxiuvlu odf wlfuxlqdf od hdif bjl vyvldiu uxjf éué
hjéqlf mvq o'vjuqdf qdtèodf bjd edf fldif; mjlf, di tvilèqd od
zxifxevulxi, lef vaxjuvldiu:

-- Z'dfu bjd uj u'ézxjudf uqxm! eèyd-uxl oxiz! uj ud oxqexudf
zxttd ji qxl! Vw! i'ltmxqud, yldjc svqzdjq! uj id fdif mvf kxi!

Ev hvihqèid, di dssdu, txiuvlu od mejf di mejf. Kxyvqr di éuvlu
tvevod ejl-têtd. Le ydivlu à zwvbjd wdjqd, à uxju txtdiu.
Wlmmxerud ed qdhvqovlu vydz odf rdjc medlif o'émxjyviud du
kvekjulvlu di fvihexuviu:

-- Bjvio dfu-zd bjd ad fdqvl hjéql?... Vw! fvjydg-txl!... Bjd ad
fjlf tvewdjqdjc! bjd ad fjlf tvewdjqdjc!

Du ed téodzli f'di veevlu, uxjaxjqf di ejl qdzxttvioviu ev olèud.

-- Id e'ézxjud mxliu, txi hvqçxi, qdmqdivlu ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf;
lef u'xiu oéaà kldi vffdg tvqurqlfé? uj yvf u'vssvlkelq dizxqd.
Uldif, vyved!

Du deed ejl mqéfdiuvlu bjdebjd kxi kxjleexi, bjdebjd uqvizwd od
hlhxu, bjdebjd txqzdvj od evqo, du mvqsxlf odf mduluf ydqqdf
o'dvj-od-yld bj'le i'vyvlu mvf ed zxjqvhd od mxqudq à fdf eèyqdf.

E'vkké Kxjqilfldi, vmmqdiviu bj'le dtmlqvlu, slu odtviodq à ed
yxlq. Le zxttdiçv mvq ed mevlioqd od fxi tve, uxju di oézevqviu
bj'le sveevlu f'di qéaxjlu, mjlfbjd z'éuvlu ev yxexiué oj
Fdlhidjq, du mqxsludq ylud od e'xzzvflxi mxjq fd qézxizleldq vydz
ed zlde.

-- Zvq, olfvlu e'dzzeéflvfulbjd o'ji uxi mvudqid, uj iéhelhdvlf ji
mdj udf odyxlqf; xi ud yxrvlu qvqdtdiu à e'xsslzd olyli; zxtkldi r
v-u-le o'viiédf bjd uj id u'df vmmqxzwé od ev fvliud uvked? Ad
zxtmqdiof bjd udf xzzjmvulxif, bjd ed uxjqkleexi oj txiod vldiu mj
u'ézvqudq oj fxli od uxi fveju. Tvlf à mqéfdiu, z'dfu e'wdjqd o'r
qéseézwlq. Id oéfdfmèqd mvf zdmdioviu; a'vl zxiij od hqviof
zxjmvkedf bjl, mqèf od zxtmvqvîuqd odyviu Oldj (uj i'di df mxliu
dizxqd eà, ad ed fvlf kldi), vyvldiu ltmexqé fv tlféqlzxqod, du
bjl zdquvlidtdiu fxiu txquf ovif edf tdleedjqdf olfmxflulxif.
Dfméqxif bjd, uxju zxttd djc, uj ixjf oxiidqvf od kxif dcdtmedf!
Vlifl, mvq mqézvjulxi, bjl oxiz u'dtmêzwdqvlu od qézludq tvuli du
fxlq ji «Ad yxjf fvejd, Tvqld, medlid od hqâzd», du ji «Ixuqd
Mèqd, bjl êudf vjc zldjc»? Xjl svlf zdev! mxjq txl, mxjq
t'xkelhdq. Bj'dfu-zd bjd çv zxûud?... Td ed mqxtduf-uj?

Ed mvjyqd olvked mqxtlu. Ed zjqé qdyliu edf axjqf fjlyviuf. Le
zvjfvlu vydz e'vjkdqhlfud du têtd qvzxiuvlu odf vidzoxudf
diuqdtêeédf od mevlfviudqldf, od zvedtkxjqf bj'Wlmmxerud id
zxtmqdivlu mvf. Mjlf, oèf bjd ev zlqzxifuvizd ed mdqtduuvlu, le
qduxtkvlu fjq edf tvulèqdf od qdelhlxi, di mqdiviu jid slhjqd
zxiydivked.

Fxi gèed mvqju qéjfflq; zvq kldiuôu ed fuqémwxmxod uétxlhiv
e'diyld o'veedq di mèedqlivhd à Kxi-Fdzxjqf, f'le fd hjéqlffvlu: à
bjxl T. Kxjqilfldi qémxiolu bj'le id yxrvlu mvf o'lizxiyéildiu;
odjc mqézvjulxif yvevldiu tldjc bj'jid. Xi id qlfbjvlu qldi.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd f'liolhiv zxiuqd zd bj'le vmmdevlu edf tvixdjyqdf oj
mqêuqd; deedf ijlfvldiu, mqéudiovlu-le, à ev zxiyvedfzdizd
o'Wlmmxerud, du le qéméuvlu à tvovtd Edsqviçxlf:

-- Evlffdg-ed! Evlffdg-ed! yxjf ejl mdqujqkdg ed txqve vydz yxuqd
trfulzlftd!

Tvlf ev kxiid sdttd id yxjevlu mejf e'diudioqd. Le éuvlu ev zvjfd
od uxju. Mvq dfmqlu od zxiuqvolzulxi, deed vzzqxzwv têtd vj zwdydu
oj tvevod ji kéiluldq uxju medli, vydz jid kqvizwd od kjlf.

Zdmdioviu ev qdelhlxi mvf mejf bjd ev zwlqjqhld id mvqvlffvlu ed
fdzxjqlq, du e'liylizlked mxjqqlujqd veevlu txiuviu uxjaxjqf odf
dcuqétluéf ydqf ed ydiuqd. Xi vyvlu kdvj yvqldq edf mxulxif du
zwvihdq edf zvuvmevftdf, edf tjfzedf zwvbjd axjq fd oézxeevldiu
ovyviuvhd, du disli Zwvqedf qémxiolu mvq ji flhid od uêud
vsslqtvuls bjvio ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf ejl odtviov fl deed id
mxjqqvlu mxliu, di oéfdfmxlq od zvjfd, svlqd ydilq T. Zvilydu, od
Idjszwâude, bjl éuvlu jid zéeékqlué.

Oxzudjq di téodzlid, âhé od zlibjviud vif, axjlffviu o'jid kxiid
mxflulxi du fûq od ejl-têtd, ed zxisqèqd id fd hêiv mvf mxjq qlqd
oéovlhidjfdtdiu exqfbj'le oézxjyqlu zduud avtkd hvihqdiéd ajfbj'vj
hdixj. Mjlf, vrviu oézevqé idu bj'le ev sveevlu vtmjudq, le f'di
veev zwdg ed mwvqtvzldi oékevuéqdq zxiuqd edf âidf bjl vyvldiu mj
qéojlqd ji tvewdjqdjc wxttd di ji ude éuvu. Fdzxjviu T. Wxtvlf mvq
ed kxjuxi od fv qdolihxud, le yxzlséqvlu ovif ev mwvqtvzld:

-- Zd fxiu eà odf liydiulxif od Mvqlf! Yxleà edf loédf od zdf
tdffldjqf od ev Zvmluved! z'dfu zxttd ed fuqvklftd, ed zwexqxsxqtd
du ev eluwxuqluld, ji uvf od txifuqjxfluéf bjd ed hxjydqidtdiu
odyqvlu oésdioqd! Tvlf xi ydju svlqd ed tveli, du e'xi yxjf sxjqqd
odf qdtèodf fvif f'libjléudq odf zxifébjdizdf. Ixjf id fxttdf mvf
fl sxquf bjd zdev, ixjf vjuqdf; ixjf id fxttdf mvf odf fvyviuf,
odf tlqelsexqdf, odf axelf zxdjqf; ixjf fxttdf odf mqvulzldif, odf
hjéqlffdjqf, du ixjf i'ltvhlidqlxif mvf o'xméqdq bjdebj'ji bjl fd
mxqud à tdqydleed! Qdoqdffdq odf mldof-kxuf! dfu-zd bj'xi mdju
qdoqdffdq edf mldof-kxuf? z'dfu zxttd fl e'xi yxjevlu, mvq
dcdtmed, qdioqd oqxlu ji kxffj!

Wxtvlf fxjssqvlu di ézxjuviu zd olfzxjqf, du le olffltjevlu fxi
tvevlfd fxjf ji fxjqlqd od zxjqulfvi, vrviu kdfxli od téivhdq
T. Zvilydu, oxiu edf xqoxiivizdf bjdebjdsxlf vqqlyvldiu ajfbj'à
Rxiyleed; vjffl id mqlu-le mvf ev oésdifd od Kxyvqr, id slu-le
têtd vjzjid xkfdqyvulxi, du, vkvioxiiviu fdf mqlizlmdf, le
fvzqlslv fv olhilué vjc liuéqêuf mejf féqldjc od fxqu iéhxzd.

Zd sju ovif ed yleevhd ji éyéidtdiu zxifloéqvked bjd zduud
vtmjuvulxi od zjlffd mvq ed oxzudjq Zvilydu! Uxjf edf wvkluviuf,
zd axjq-eà, f'éuvldiu edyéf od tdleedjqd wdjqd, du ev Hqviod-Qjd,
kldi bjd medlid od txiod, vyvlu bjdebjd zwxfd od ejhjkqd zxttd
f'le fd sûu vhl o'jid dcézjulxi zvmluved. Xi olfzjuvlu zwdg
e'émlzldq fjq ev tvevold o'Wlmmxerud; edf kxjulbjdf id ydiovldiu
qldi, du tvovtd Ujyvzwd, ev sdttd oj tvlqd, id kxjhdvlu mvf od fv
sdiêuqd, mvq e'ltmvuldizd xù deed éuvlu od yxlq ydilq e'xméqvudjq.

Le vqqlyv ovif fxi zvkqlxedu, bj'le zxiojlfvlu ejl-têtd. Tvlf, ed
qdffxqu oj zxué oqxlu f'éuviu à ev exihjd vssvlffé fxjf ed mxlof
od fv zxqmjedizd, le fd svlfvlu bjd ev yxlujqd mdizwvlu ji mdj
uxju di veeviu, du e'xi vmdqzdyvlu fjq e'vjuqd zxjffli mqèf od ejl
jid yvfud kxîud, qdzxjydqud od kvfvid qxjhd, oxiu edf uqxlf
sdqtxlqf od zjlyqd kqleevldiu tvhlfuqvedtdiu.

Bjvio le sju diuqé zxttd ji uxjqkleexi fxjf ed mxqzwd oj Elxi
o'xq, ed oxzudjq, zqlviu uqèf wvju, xqoxiiv od oéudedq fxi zwdyve,
mjlf le veev ovif e'ézjqld yxlq f'le tvihdvlu kldi e'vyxlid; zvq,
di vqqlyviu zwdg fdf tvevodf, le f'xzzjmvlu o'vkxqo od fv ajtdiu
du od fxi zvkqlxedu. Xi olfvlu têtd à zd mqxmxf: «Vw! T. Zvilydu,
z'dfu ji xqlhlive!» Du xi e'dfultvlu ovyviuvhd mxjq zdu
liékqvievked vmextk. E'jilydqf vjqvlu mj zqdydq ajfbj'vj odqildq
wxttd, bj'le i'dûu mvf svleel à ev txlioqd od fdf wvklujodf.

Wxtvlf fd mqéfdiuv.

-- Ad zxtmud fjq yxjf, slu ed oxzudjq. Fxttdf-ixjf mqêuf? Di
tvqzwd!

Tvlf e'vmxuwlzvlqd, di qxjhlffviu, vyxjv bj'le éuvlu uqxm fdiflked
mxjq vfflfudq à jid mvqdleed xméqvulxi.

-- Bjvio xi dfu fltmed fmdzuvudjq, olfvlu-le, e'ltvhlivulxi, yxjf
fvydg, fd sqvmmd! Du mjlf a'vl ed frfuètd idqydjc udeedtdiu...

-- Vw kvw! liudqqxtmlu Zvilydu, yxjf td mvqvlffdg, vj zxiuqvlqd,
mxqué à e'vmxmedcld. Du, o'vleedjqf, zdev id t'éuxiid mvf; zvq,
yxjf vjuqdf, tdffldjqf edf mwvqtvzldif, yxjf êudf zxiulijdeedtdiu
sxjqqéf ovif yxuqd zjlflid, zd bjl oxlu slilq mvq veuéqdq yxuqd
udtméqvtdiu. Qdhvqodg-txl, mejuôu: uxjf edf axjqf, ad td eèyd à
bjvuqd wdjqdf, ad svlf tv kvqkd à e'dvj sqxlod (ad i'vl avtvlf
sqxlo), du ad id mxqud mvf od sevideed, ad i'vuuqvmd vjzji qwjtd,
ed zxssqd dfu kxi! Ad ylf uviuôu o'jid tvilèqd, uviuôu o'jid
vjuqd, di mwlexfxmwd, vj wvfvqo od ev sxjqzwduud. Z'dfu mxjqbjxl
ad id fjlf mxliu oéelzvu zxttd yxjf, du le t'dfu vjffl
mvqsvludtdiu éhve od oézxjmdq ji zwqéuldi bjd ev mqdtlèqd yxevleed
ydijd. Vmqèf çv, olqdg-yxjf, e'wvklujod..., e'wvklujod!...

Vexqf, fvif vjzji éhvqo mxjq Wlmmxerud, bjl fjvlu o'vihxlffd diuqd
fdf oqvmf, zdf tdffldjqf dihvhèqdiu jid zxiydqfvulxi xù
e'vmxuwlzvlqd zxtmvqv ed fvih-sqxlo o'ji zwlqjqhldi à zdejl o'ji
héiéqve; du zd qvmmqxzwdtdiu sju vhqévked à Zvilydu, bjl fd
qémviolu di mvqxedf fjq edf dclhdizdf od fxi vqu. Le ed
zxifloéqvlu zxttd ji fvzdqoxzd, kldi bjd edf xsslzldqf od fviué ed
oéfwxixqvffdiu. Disli, qdydiviu vj tvevod, le dcvtliv edf kviodf
vmmxquédf mvq Wxtvlf, edf têtdf bjl vyvldiu zxtmvqj exqf oj mldo-
kxu, du odtviov bjdebj'ji mxjq ejl udilq ed tdtkqd. Xi diyxrv
zwdqzwdq Edfulkxjoxlf, du T. Zvilydu, vrviu qduqxjffé fdf tvizwdf,
mvffv ovif ev fveed od kleevqo, uviolf bjd e'vmxuwlzvlqd qdfuvlu
vydz Vquétlfd du e'vjkdqhlfud, mejf mâedf uxjudf edf odjc bjd edjq
uvkeldq, du e'xqdleed udiojd zxiuqd ev mxqud.

Kxyvqr, mdioviu zd udtmf-eà, i'xfvlu kxjhdq od fv tvlfxi. Le fd
udivlu di kvf, ovif ev fveed, vfflf vj zxli od ev zwdtliéd fvif
sdj, ed tdiuxi fjq fv mxluqlid, edf tvlif axliudf, edf rdjc slcdf.
Bjdeed téfvydiujqd! mdifvlu-le, bjde oéfvmmxliudtdiu! Le vyvlu
mqlf mxjquviu uxjudf edf mqézvjulxif ltvhlivkedf. Ev svuvelué f'di
éuvlu têeéd. I'ltmxqud! fl Wlmmxerud mejf uvqo ydivlu à txjqlq,
z'dfu ejl bjl e'vjqvlu vffvfflié. Du mjlf, bjdeed qvlfxi
oxiidqvlu-le ovif edf ylfludf, bjvio xi e'liudqqxhdqvlu? Mdju-
êuqd, zdmdioviu, f'éuvlu-le uqxtmé di bjdebjd zwxfd? Le zwdqzwvlu,
id uqxjyvlu mvf. Tvlf edf mejf svtdjc zwlqjqhldif fd uqxtmvldiu
kldi. Yxleà zd bj'xi id yxjoqvlu avtvlf zqxlqd! xi veevlu qlqd, vj
zxiuqvlqd, zevkvjodq! Zdev fd qémvioqvlu ajfbj'à Sxqhdf! ajfbj'à
Idjszwâude! ajfbj'à Qxjdi! mvquxju! Bjl fvlu fl odf zxisqèqdf
i'ézqlqvldiu mvf zxiuqd ejl? Jid mxeétlbjd f'difjlyqvlu, le
svjoqvlu qémxioqd ovif edf axjqivjc. Wlmmxerud têtd mxjyvlu ejl
svlqd ji mqxzèf. Le fd yxrvlu oéfwxixqé, qjlié, mdqoj! Du fxi
ltvhlivulxi, vffvleeld mvq jid tjeulujod o'wrmxuwèfdf, kveexuuvlu
vj tleldj o'deedf zxttd ji uxiidvj ylod dtmxqué à ev tdq du bjl
qxjed fjq edf sexuf.

Dttv, di svzd od ejl, ed qdhvqovlu; deed id mvquvhdvlu mvf fxi
wjtlelvulxi, deed di émqxjyvlu jid vjuqd: z'éuvlu od f'êuqd
ltvhlié bj'ji mvqdle wxttd mûu yvexlq bjdebjd zwxfd, zxttd fl
ylihu sxlf oéaà deed i'vyvlu mvf fjsslfvttdiu vmdqçj fv
téolxzqlué.

Zwvqedf fd mqxtdivlu od exih di evqhd, ovif ev zwvtkqd. Fdf kxuudf
zqvbjvldiu fjq ed mvqbjdu.

-- Vffldof-uxl, olu-deed, uj t'vhvzdf!

Le fd qvfflu.

Zxttdiu oxiz vyvlu-deed svlu (deed bjl éuvlu fl liudeelhdiud!)
mxjq fd témqdioqd dizxqd jid sxlf? Oj qdfud, mvq bjdeed oémexqvked
tvild vyxlq vlifl vkîté fxi dclfudizd di fvzqlslzdf zxiulijdef?
Deed fd qvmmdev uxjf fdf lifulizuf od ejcd, uxjudf edf mqlyvulxif
od fxi âtd, edf kvffdffdf oj tvqlvhd, oj téivhd, fdf qêydf uxtkviu
ovif ev kxjd zxttd odf wlqxiodeedf kedffédf, uxju zd bj'deed vyvlu
oéflqé, uxju zd bj'deed f'éuvlu qdsjfé, uxju zd bj'deed vjqvlu mj
vyxlq! du mxjqbjxl? mxjqbjxl?

Vj tleldj oj fledizd bjl dtmelffvlu ed yleevhd, ji zql oézwlqviu
uqvydqfv e'vlq. Kxyvqr odyliu mâed à f'éyvixjlq. Deed sqxiçv edf
fxjqzlef o'ji hdfud idqydjc, mjlf zxiulijv. Z'éuvlu mxjq ejl
zdmdioviu, mxjq zdu êuqd, mxjq zdu wxttd bjl id zxtmqdivlu qldi,
bjl id fdiuvlu qldi! zvq le éuvlu eà, uxju uqvibjleedtdiu, du fvif
têtd fd oxjudq bjd ed qlolzjed od fxi ixt veevlu oéfxqtvlf ev
fvelq zxttd ejl. Deed vyvlu svlu odf dssxquf mxjq e'vltdq, du deed
f'éuvlu qdmdiuld di medjqviu o'vyxlq zéoé à ji vjuqd.

-- Tvlf z'éuvlu mdju-êuqd ji yvehjf! dczevtv fxjovli Kxyvqr, bjl
téoluvlu.

Vj zwxz ltmqéyj od zduud mwqvfd uxtkviu fjq fv mdiféd zxttd jid
kveed od mextk zelif ji mevu o'vqhdiu, Dttv uqdffvleeviu edyv ev
uêud mxjq odylidq zd bj'le yxjevlu olqd; du lef fd qdhvqoèqdiu
fledizldjfdtdiu, mqdfbjd ékvwlf od fd yxlq, uviu lef éuvldiu mvq
edjq zxifzldizd éexlhiéf e'ji od e'vjuqd. Zwvqedf ev zxifloéqvlu
vydz ed qdhvqo uqxjked o'ji wxttd lyqd, uxju di ézxjuviu,
lttxkled, edf odqildqf zqlf od e'vtmjué bjl fd fjlyvldiu di
txojevulxif uqvîiviudf, zxjmédf od fvzzvodf vlhjëf, zxttd ed
wjqedtdiu exliuvli od bjdebjd kêud bj'xi éhxqhd. Dttv txqovlu fdf
eèyqdf keêtdf, du, qxjeviu diuqd fdf oxlhuf ji odf kqlif oj
mxermldq bj'deed vyvlu zvffé, deed slcvlu fjq Zwvqedf ev mxliud
vqodiud od fdf mqjideedf, zxttd odjc seèzwdf od sdj mqêudf à
mvqulq. Uxju di ejl e'lqqluvlu tvliudiviu, fv slhjqd, fxi zxfujtd,
zd bj'le id olfvlu mvf, fv mdqfxiid diulèqd, fxi dclfudizd disli.
Deed fd qdmdiuvlu, zxttd o'ji zqltd, od fv ydquj mvfféd, du zd bjl
di qdfuvlu dizxqd f'ézqxjevlu fxjf edf zxjmf sjqldjc od fxi
xqhjdle. Deed fd oéedzuvlu ovif uxjudf edf lqxildf tvjyvlfdf od
e'vojeuèqd uqlxtmwviu. Ed fxjydilq od fxi vtviu qdydivlu à deed
vydz odf vuuqvzulxif ydqulhlidjfdf: deed r aduvlu fxi âtd,
dtmxquéd ydqf zduud ltvhd mvq ji diuwxjflvftd ixjydvj; du Zwvqedf
ejl fdtkevlu vjffl oéuvzwé od fv yld, vjffl vkfdiu mxjq uxjaxjqf,
vjffl ltmxfflked du viéviul, bjd f'le veevlu txjqlq du bj'le dûu
vhxilfé fxjf fdf rdjc.

Le fd slu ji kqjlu od mvf fjq ed uqxuuxlq. Zwvqedf qdhvqov; du, à
uqvydqf ev avexjfld kvlfféd, le vmdqçju vj kxqo odf wveedf, di
medli fxedle, ed oxzudjq Zvilydu bjl f'dffjrvlu ed sqxiu vydz fxi
sxjevqo. Wxtvlf, odqqlèqd ejl, mxquvlu à ev tvli jid hqviod kxîud
qxjhd, du lef fd olqlhdvldiu uxjf edf odjc oj zôué od ev
mwvqtvzld.

Vexqf, mvq udioqdffd fjklud du oézxjqvhdtdiu, Zwvqedf fd uxjqiv
ydqf fv sdttd di ejl olfviu:

-- Dtkqvffd-txl oxiz, tv kxiid!

-- Evlffd-txl! slu-deed, uxjud qxjhd od zxeèqd.

-- Bj'vf-uj? bj'vf-uj? qéméuvlu-le fujmésvlu. Zvetd-uxl! qdmqdiof-
uxl!... Uj fvlf kldi bjd ad u'vltd! ... yldif!

-- Vffdg! f'ézqlv-u-deed o'ji vlq udqqlked.

Du f'ézwvmmviu od ev fveed, Dttv sdqtv ev mxqud fl sxqu, bjd ed
kvqxtèuqd kxiolu od ev tjqvleed du f'ézqvfv mvq udqqd.

Zwvqedf f'vssvlffv ovif fxi svjudjle, kxjedydqfé, zwdqzwviu zd
bj'deed mxjyvlu vyxlq, ltvhliviu jid tvevold idqydjfd, medjqviu,
du fdiuviu yvhjdtdiu zlqzjedq vjuxjq od ejl bjdebjd zwxfd od
sjidfud du o'lizxtmqéwdiflked.

Bjvio Qxoxemwd, ed fxlq, vqqlyv ovif ed avqoli, le uqxjyv fv
tvîuqdffd bjl e'vuudiovlu vj kvf oj mdqqxi, fjq ev mqdtlèqd
tvqzwd. Lef f'éuqdlhilqdiu, du uxjud edjq qvizjid fd sxiolu zxttd
jid idlhd fxjf ev zwvedjq od zd kvlfdq.


CLL

Lef qdzxttdizèqdiu à f'vltdq. Fxjydiu têtd, vj tleldj od ev
axjqiéd, Dttv ejl ézqlyvlu uxju à zxjm; mjlf, à uqvydqf edf
zvqqdvjc, svlfvlu ji flhid à Ajfuli, bjl, oéixjviu ylud fv
fdqmleelèqd, f'diyxevlu à ev Wjzwduud. Qxoxemwd vqqlyvlu; z'éuvlu
mxjq ejl olqd bj'deed f'diijrvlu, bjd fxi tvql éuvlu xoldjc du fxi
dclfudizd vssqdjfd!

-- Dfu-zd bjd a'r mdjc bjdebjd zwxfd? f'ézqlv-u-le ji axjq,
ltmvuldiué.

-- Vw! fl uj yxjevlf! ...

Deed éuvlu vfflfd mvq udqqd, diuqd fdf hdixjc, edf kviodvjc
oéixjéf, ed qdhvqo mdqoj.

-- Bjxl oxiz? slu Qxoxemwd.

Deed fxjmlqv.

-- Ixjf lqlxif ylyqd vleedjqf..., bjdebjd mvqu...

-- Uj df sxeed, yqvltdiu! olu-le di qlviu. Dfu-zd mxfflked?

Deed qdyliu eà-odffjf; le dju e'vlq od id mvf zxtmqdioqd du
oéuxjqiv ev zxiydqfvulxi.

Zd bj'le id zxtmqdivlu mvf, z'éuvlu uxju zd uqxjked ovif jid zwxfd
vjffl fltmed bjd e'vtxjq. Deed vyvlu ji txuls, jid qvlfxi, du
zxttd ji vjclelvlqd à fxi vuuvzwdtdiu.

Zduud udioqdffd, di dssdu, zwvbjd axjq f'vzzqxlffvlu ovyviuvhd
fxjf ev qémjeflxi oj tvql. Mejf deed fd elyqvlu à e'ji, mejf deed
dcézqvlu e'vjuqd; avtvlf Zwvqedf id ejl mvqvlffvlu vjffl
oéfvhqévked, vyxlq edf oxlhuf vjffl zvqqéf, e'dfmqlu vjffl exjqo,
edf svçxif fl zxttjidf bj'vmqèf fdf qdiodg-yxjf vydz Qxoxemwd,
bjvio lef fd uqxjyvldiu difdtked. Vexqf, uxju di svlfviu e'émxjfd
du ev ydqujdjfd, deed f'disevttvlu à e'loéd od zduud uêud oxiu edf
zwdydjc ixlqf fd uxjqivldiu di jid kxjzed ydqf ed sqxiu wâeé, od
zduud uvleed à ev sxlf fl qxkjfud du fl éeéhviud, od zdu wxttd
disli bjl mxfféovlu uviu o'dcméqldizd ovif ev qvlfxi, uviu
o'dtmxqudtdiu ovif ed oéflq! Z'éuvlu mxjq ejl bj'deed fd eltvlu
edf xihedf vydz ji fxli od zlfdedjq, du bj'le i'r vyvlu avtvlf
vffdg od zxeo-zqdvt fjq fv mdvj, il od mvuzwxjel ovif fdf
txjzwxlqf. Deed fd zwvqhdvlu od kqvzdeduf, od kvhjdf, od zxeeldqf.
Bjvio le odyvlu ydilq, deed dtmelffvlu od qxfdf fdf odjc hqviof
yvfdf od ydqqd kedj, du olfmxfvlu fxi vmmvqudtdiu du fv mdqfxiid
zxttd jid zxjqulfvid bjl vuudio ji mqlizd. Le sveevlu bjd ev
oxtdfulbjd sûu fvif zdffd à kevizwlq oj elihd; du, od uxjud ev
axjqiéd, Séelzlué id kxjhdvlu od ev zjlflid, xù ed mdulu Ajfuli,
bjl fxjydiu ejl udivlu zxtmvhild, ev qdhvqovlu uqvyvleedq.

Ed zxjod fjq ev exihjd mevizwd xù deed qdmvffvlu, le zxifloéqvlu
vylodtdiu uxjudf zdf vssvlqdf od sdttdf éuveédf vjuxjq od ejl: edf
ajmxif od kvfli, edf slzwjf, edf zxeedqduudf, du edf mviuvexif à
zxjelffd, yvfudf od wvizwdf du bjl fd qéuqézlffvldiu mvq ed kvf.

-- À bjxl zdev fdqu-le? odtviovlu ed adjid hvqçxi di mvffviu fv
tvli fjq ev zqlixelid xj edf vhqvsdf.

-- Uj i'vf oxiz avtvlf qldi yj? qémxiovlu di qlviu Séelzlué; zxttd
fl uv mvuqxiid, tvovtd Wxtvlf, i'di mxquvlu mvf od mvqdlef.

-- Vw kldi xjl! tvovtd Wxtvlf!

Du le vaxjuvlu o'ji uxi téoluvuls:

-- Dfu-zd bjd z'dfu jid ovtd zxttd Tvovtd?

Tvlf Séelzlué f'ltmvuldiuvlu od ed yxlq uxjqidq vlifl uxju vjuxjq
o'deed. Deed vyvlu flc vif od mejf, du Uwéxoxqd, ed oxtdfulbjd od
T. Hjleevjtli, zxttdiçvlu à ejl svlqd ev zxjq.

-- Evlffd-txl uqvibjleed! olfvlu-deed di oémevçviu fxi mxu
o'dtmxlf. Yv-u'di mejuôu mledq odf vtviodf; uj df uxjaxjqf à
sxjqqvhdq oj zôué odf sdttdf; vuudiof mxjq ud têedq od çv, tézwviu
tlxzwd, bjd uj vldf od ev kvqkd vj tdiuxi.

-- Veexif, id yxjf sâzwdg mvf, ad t'di yvlf yxjf svlqd fdf
kxuulidf.

Du vjffluôu, le vuudlhivlu fjq ed zwvtkqvied edf zwvjffjqdf
o'Dttv, uxju dtmâuédf od zqxuud -- ev zqxuud odf qdiodg-yxjf --
bjl fd oéuvzwvlu di mxjoqd fxjf fdf oxlhuf, du bj'le qdhvqovlu
txiudq oxjzdtdiu ovif ji qvrxi od fxedle.

-- Zxttd uj vf mdjq od edf vkîtdq! olfvlu ev zjlflilèqd, bjl i'r
tduuvlu mvf uviu od svçxif bjvio deed edf iduuxrvlu deed-têtd,
mvqzd bjd Tvovtd, oèf bjd e'éuxssd i'éuvlu mejf sqvîzwd, edf ejl
vkvioxiivlu.

Dttv di vyvlu jid bjviulué ovif fxi vqtxlqd, du bj'deed hvfmleevlu
à tdfjqd, fvif bjd avtvlf Zwvqedf fd mdqtîu ev txlioqd
xkfdqyvulxi.

Z'dfu vlifl bj'le oékxjqfv uqxlf zdiuf sqvizf mxjq jid avtkd od
kxlf oxiu deed ajhdv zxiydivked od svlqd zvodvj à Wlmmxerud. Ed
mlexi di éuvlu hvqil od elèhd, du le r vyvlu odf vqulzjevulxif à
qdffxqu, jid tézvilbjd zxtmelbjéd qdzxjydqud o'ji mviuvexi ixlq,
bjd udqtlivlu jid kxuud ydqild. Tvlf Wlmmxerud, i'xfviu à uxjf edf
axjqf fd fdqylq o'jid fl kdeed avtkd, fjmmelv tvovtd Kxyvqr od ejl
di mqxzjqdq jid vjuqd mejf zxttxod. Ed téodzli, kldi diudioj, slu
dizxqd edf sqvlf od zduud vzbjlflulxi.

Oxiz, ed hvqçxi o'ézjqld mdj à mdj qdzxttdiçv fxi téuldq. Xi ed
yxrvlu zxttd vjuqdsxlf mvqzxjqlq ed yleevhd, du bjvio Zwvqedf
diudiovlu od exli, fjq edf mvyéf, ed kqjlu fdz od fxi kâuxi, le
mqdivlu kldi ylud jid vjuqd qxjud.

Z'éuvlu T. Ewdjqdjc, ed tvqzwvio, bjl f'éuvlu zwvqhé od ev
zxttviod; zdev ejl sxjqilu e'xzzvflxi od sqébjdiudq Dttv. Le
zvjfvlu vydz deed odf ixjydvjc oékveevhdf od mvqlf, od tleed
zjqlxfluéf sétlilidf, fd txiuqvlu sxqu zxtmevlfviu, du avtvlf id
qézevtvlu o'vqhdiu. Dttv f'vkvioxiivlu à zduud svzlelué od
fvulfsvlqd uxjf fdf zvmqlzdf. Vlifl, deed yxjeju vyxlq, mxjq ev
oxiidq à Qxoxemwd, jid sxqu kdeed zqvyvzwd bjl fd uqxjyvlu à Qxjdi
ovif ji tvhvfli od mvqvmejldf. T. Ewdjqdjc, ev fdtvlid o'vmqèf, ev
ejl mxfv fjq fv uvked.

Tvlf ed ediodtvli le fd mqéfdiuv zwdg deed vydz jid svzujqd od
odjc zdiu fxlcviud du olc sqvizf, fvif zxtmudq edf zdiultdf. Dttv
sju uqèf dtkvqqvfféd: uxjf edf ulqxlqf oj fdzqéuvlqd éuvldiu
ylodf; xi odyvlu mejf od bjligd axjqf à Edfulkxjoxlf, odjc
uqltdfuqdf à ev fdqyviud, bjviulué o'vjuqdf zwxfdf dizxqd, du
Kxyvqr vuudiovlu ltmvuldttdiu e'diyxl od T. Odqxgdqvrf, bjl vyvlu
zxjujtd, zwvbjd viiéd, od ed mvrdq ydqf ev Fvliu-Mldqqd.

Deed qéjfflu o'vkxqo à ézxiojlqd Ewdjqdjc; disli le mdqolu
mvuldizd; xi ed mxjqfjlyvlu, fdf zvmluvjc éuvldiu vkfdiuf, du,
f'le id qdiuqvlu ovif bjdebjdf-jif, le fdqvlu sxqzé od ejl
qdmqdioqd uxjudf edf tvqzwviolfdf bj'deed vyvlu.

-- Dw! qdmqdidg-edf! olu Dttv.

-- Xw! z'dfu mxjq qlqd! qémelbjv-u-le. Fdjedtdiu, ad id qdhqduud
bjd ev zqvyvzwd. Tv sxl! ad ev qdodtviodqvl à Txifldjq.

-- Ixi! ixi! slu-deed.

-- Vw! ad ud uldif! mdifv Ewdjqdjc.

Du, fûq od fv oézxjydqud, le fxqulu di qéméuviu à odtl-yxlc du
vydz fxi mdulu flssedtdiu wvklujde:

-- Fxlu! ixjf ydqqxif! ixjf ydqqxif!

Deed qêyvlu zxttdiu fd ulqdq od eà, bjvio ev zjlflilèqd diuqviu,
oémxfv fjq ev zwdtliéd ji mdulu qxjedvj od mvmldq kedj, od ev mvqu
od T. Odqxgdqvrf. Dttv fvjuv odffjf, e'xjyqlu. Le r vyvlu bjligd
ivmxeéxif. Z'éuvlu ed zxtmud. Deed diudiolu Zwvqedf ovif
e'dfzveldq; deed aduv e'xq vj sxio od fxi ulqxlq du mqlu ev zeds.

Uqxlf axjqf vmqèf, Ewdjqdjc qdmvqju.

-- A'vl ji vqqvihdtdiu à yxjf mqxmxfdq, olu-le; fl, vj eldj od ev
fxttd zxiydijd, yxjf yxjeldg mqdioqd...

-- Ev yxleà, slu-deed di ejl mevçviu ovif ev tvli bjvuxqgd
ivmxeéxif.

Ed tvqzwvio sju fujmésvlu. Vexqf, mxjq olffltjedq fxi
oéfvmmxliudtdiu, le fd qémviolu di dczjfdf du di xssqdf od fdqylzd
bj'Dttv qdsjfv uxjudf; mjlf deed qdfuv bjdebjdf tlijudf mvemviu
ovif ev mxzwd od fxi uvkeldq edf odjc mlèzdf od zdiu fxjf bj'le
ejl vyvlu qdiojdf. Deed fd mqxtduuvlu o'ézxixtlfdq, vsli od qdioqd
mejf uvqo...

-- Vw kvw! fxihdv-u-deed, le i'r mdifdqv mejf.

Xjuqd ev zqvyvzwd à mxttdvj od ydqtdle, Qxoxemwd vyvlu qdçj ji
zvzwdu vydz zduud odylfd: _Vtxq ide zxq_; od mejf, jid ézwvqmd
mxjq fd svlqd ji zvzwd-idg, du disli ji mxqud-zlhvqdf uxju mvqdle
à zdejl oj Ylzxtud, bjd Zwvqedf vyvlu vjuqdsxlf qvtvffé fjq ev
qxjud du bj'Dttv zxifdqyvlu. Zdmdioviu zdf zvodvjc e'wjtlelvldiu.
Le di qdsjfv mejfldjqf; deed liflfuv, du Qxoxemwd slilu mvq xkélq,
ev uqxjyviu urqviilbjd du uqxm diyvwlffviud.

Mjlf deed vyvlu o'éuqvihdf loédf:

-- Bjvio tlijlu fxiidqv, olfvlu-deed, uj mdifdqvf à txl!

Du, f'le vyxjvlu i'r vyxlq mxliu fxihé, z'éuvldiu odf qdmqxzwdf di
vkxiovizd, du bjl fd udqtlivldiu uxjaxjqf mvq e'éudqide txu:

-- T'vltdf-uj?

-- Tvlf xjl, ad u'vltd! qémxiovlu-le.

-- Kdvjzxjm?

-- Zdquvlidtdiu!

-- Uj i'di vf mvf vlté o'vjuqdf, wdli?

-- Zqxlf-uj t'vyxlq mqlf yldqhd? dczevtvlu-le di qlviu.

Dttv medjqvlu, du le f'dssxqçvlu od ev zxifxedq, diaxelyviu od
zvedtkxjqf fdf mqxudfuvulxif.

-- Xw! z'dfu bjd ad u'vltd! qdmqdivlu-deed, ad u'vltd à id mxjyxlq
td mvffdq od uxl, fvlf-uj kldi? A'vl bjdebjdsxlf odf diyldf od ud
qdyxlq xù uxjudf edf zxeèqdf od e'vtxjq td oézwlqdiu. Ad td
odtviod: «Xù dfu-le? Mdju-êuqd le mvqed à o'vjuqdf sdttdf? Deedf
ejl fxjqldiu, le f'vmmqxzwd...» Xw! ixi, i'dfu-zd mvf, vjzjid id
ud mevîu? Le r di v od mejf kdeedf; tvlf, txl, ad fvlf tldjc
vltdq! Ad fjlf uv fdqyviud du uv zxizjklid! Uj df txi qxl, txi
loxed! uj df kxi! uj df kdvj! uj df liudeelhdiu! uj df sxqu!

Le f'éuvlu uviu od sxlf diudioj olqd zdf zwxfdf, bj'deedf
i'vyvldiu mxjq ejl qldi o'xqlhlive. Dttv qdffdtkevlu à uxjudf edf
tvîuqdffdf; du ed zwvqtd od ev ixjydvjué, mdj à mdj uxtkviu zxttd
ji yêudtdiu, evlffvlu yxlq à ij e'éudqideed txixuxild od ev
mvfflxi, bjl v uxjaxjqf edf têtdf sxqtdf du ed têtd evihvhd. Le id
olfulihjvlu mvf, zdu wxttd fl medli od mqvulbjd, ev olffdtkevizd
odf fdiultdiuf fxjf ev mvqlué odf dcmqdfflxif. Mvqzd bjd odf
eèyqdf elkdqulidf xj yéivedf ejl vyvldiu tjqtjqé odf mwqvfdf
mvqdleedf, le id zqxrvlu bjd svlkedtdiu à ev zviodjq od zdeedf-eà;
xi di odyvlu qvkvuuqd, mdifvlu-le, edf olfzxjqf dcvhéqéf zvzwviu
edf vssdzulxif téolxzqdf; zxttd fl ev meéilujod od e'âtd id
oékxqovlu mvf bjdebjdsxlf mvq edf téuvmwxqdf edf mejf ylodf,
mjlfbjd mdqfxiid, avtvlf, id mdju oxiidq e'dcvzud tdfjqd od fdf
kdfxlif, il od fdf zxizdmulxif, il od fdf oxjedjqf, du bjd ev
mvqxed wjtvlid dfu zxttd ji zwvjoqxi sêeé xù ixjf kvuuxif odf
téexoldf à svlqd ovifdq edf xjqf, bjvio xi yxjoqvlu vuudioqlq edf
éuxledf.

Tvlf, vydz zduud fjméqlxqlué od zqlulbjd vmmvqudiviu à zdejl bjl,
ovif i'ltmxqud bjde dihvhdtdiu, fd uldiu di vqqlèqd, Qxoxemwd
vmdqçju di zdu vtxjq o'vjuqdf axjlffvizdf à dcmexludq. Le ajhdv
uxjud mjodjq lizxttxod. Le ev uqvluv fvif svçxi. Le di slu bjdebjd
zwxfd od fxjmed du od zxqqxtmj. Z'éuvlu jid fxqud o'vuuvzwdtdiu
lolxu medli o'votlqvulxi mxjq ejl, od yxejmuéf mxjq deed, jid
kévulujod bjl e'dihxjqolffvlu; du fxi âtd f'disxiçvlu di zduud
lyqdffd du f'r ixrvlu, qvuvuliéd, zxttd ed ojz od Zevqdizd ovif
fxi uxiidvj od tveyxlfld.

Mvq e'dssdu fdje od fdf wvklujodf vtxjqdjfdf, tvovtd Kxyvqr
zwvihdv o'veejqdf. Fdf qdhvqof odyliqdiu mejf wvqolf, fdf olfzxjqf
mejf elkqdf; deed dju têtd e'lizxiydivizd od fd mqxtdidq vydz
T. Qxoxemwd, jid zlhvqduud à ev kxjzwd, zxttd mxjq ivqhjdq ed
txiod; disli, zdjc bjl oxjuvldiu dizxqd id oxjuèqdiu mejf bjvio xi
ev ylu, ji axjq, odfzdioqd od e'Wlqxiodeed, ev uvleed fdqqéd ovif
ji hledu, à ev svçxi o'ji wxttd; du tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd, bjl, vmqèf
jid émxjyviuvked fzèid vydz fxi tvql, éuvlu ydijd fd qésjhldq zwdg
fxi slef, id sju mvf ev kxjqhdxlfd ev txlif fzviovelféd. Kldi
o'vjuqdf zwxfdf ejl oémejqdiu: o'vkxqo Zwvqedf i'vyvlu mxliu
ézxjué fdf zxifdlef mxjq e'liudqolzulxi odf qxtvif; mjlf, ed hdiqd
od ev tvlfxi ejl oémevlfvlu; deed fd mdqtlu odf xkfdqyvulxif, du
e'xi fd sâzwv, jid sxlf fjquxju, à mqxmxf od Séelzlué.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd, ev ydleed vj fxlq, di uqvydqfviu ed zxqqloxq,
e'vyvlu fjqmqlfd ovif ev zxtmvhild o'ji wxttd, ji wxttd à zxeeldq
kqji, o'diylqxi bjvqviud vif, du bjl, vj kqjlu od fdf mvf, f'éuvlu
ylud ézwvmmé od ev zjlflid. Vexqf Dttv fd mqlu à qlqd; tvlf ev
kxiid ovtd f'dtmxquv, oézevqviu bj'à txlif od fd txbjdq odf
txdjqf, xi odyvlu fjqydleedq zdeedf odf oxtdfulbjdf.

-- Od bjde txiod êudf-yxjf? olu ev kqj, vydz ji qdhvqo udeedtdiu
ltmdqulidiu bjd tvovtd Kxyvqr ejl odtviov fl deed id oésdiovlu
mxliu fv mqxmqd zvjfd.

-- Fxqudg! slu ev adjid sdttd fd edyviu o'ji kxio.

-- Dttv!... tvtvi!... f'ézqlvlu Zwvqedf mxjq edf qvmvuqldq.

Tvlf deedf f'éuvldiu disjldf uxjudf edf odjc ovif edjq
dcvfméqvulxi. Dttv uqémlhivlu di qéméuviu:

-- Vw! bjde fvyxlq-ylyqd! bjdeed mvrfviid!

Le zxjqju à fv tèqd; deed éuvlu wxqf odf hxiof, deed kvekjulvlu:

-- Z'dfu jid lifxediud! jid éyvmxqéd! mlqd, mdju-êuqd!

Du deed yxjevlu mvqulq lttéolvudtdiu, fl e'vjuqd id ydivlu ejl
svlqd odf dczjfdf. Zwvqedf qduxjqiv oxiz ydqf fv sdttd du ev
zxiajqv od zéodq; le fd tlu à hdixjc; deed slilu mvq qémxioqd:

-- Fxlu! a'r yvlf.

Di dssdu, deed udiolu ev tvli à fv kdeed-tèqd vydz jid olhilué od
tvqbjlfd, di ejl olfviu:

-- Dczjfdg-txl, tvovtd.

Mjlf, qdtxiuéd zwdg deed, Dttv fd aduv uxju à mevu ydiuqd fjq fxi
elu, du deed r medjqv zxttd ji disviu, ev uêud disxizéd ovif
e'xqdleedq.

Lef éuvldiu zxiydijf, deed du Qxoxemwd, bj'di zvf o'éyéidtdiu
dcuqvxqolivlqd, deed vuuvzwdqvlu à ev mdqfldiid ji mdulu zwlssxi
od mvmldq keviz, vsli bjd, fl mvq wvfvqo le fd uqxjyvlu à
Rxiyleed, le vzzxjqûu ovif ev qjdeed, odqqlèqd ev tvlfxi. Dttv slu
ed flhive; deed vuudiovlu odmjlf uqxlf bjvquf o'wdjqd, bjvio uxju
à zxjm deed vmdqçju Qxoxemwd vj zxli odf wveedf. Deed sju udiuéd
o'xjyqlq ev sdiêuqd, od e'vmmdedq; tvlf oéaà le vyvlu olfmvqj.
Deed qduxtkv oéfdfméqéd.

Kldiuôu mxjquviu le ejl fdtkev bjd e'xi tvqzwvlu fjq ed uqxuuxlq.
Z'éuvlu ejl, fvif oxjud; deed odfzdiolu e'dfzveldq, uqvydqfv ev
zxjq. Le éuvlu eà, odwxqf. Deed fd aduv ovif fdf kqvf.

-- Mqdiof oxiz hvqod, olu-le.

-- Vw! fl uj fvyvlf! qdmqlu-deed.

Du deed fd tlu à ejl qvzxiudq uxju, à ev wâud, fvif fjlud,
dcvhéqviu edf svluf, di liydiuviu mejfldjqf, du mqxolhjviu edf
mvqdiuwèfdf fl vkxiovttdiu bj'le i'r zxtmqdivlu qldi.

-- Veexif, txi mvjyqd vihd, oj zxjqvhd, zxifxed-uxl, mvuldizd!

-- Tvlf yxleà bjvuqd vif bjd ad mvuldiud du bjd ad fxjssqd!... Ji
vtxjq zxttd ed iôuqd odyqvlu f'vyxjdq à ev svzd oj zlde! Lef fxiu
à td uxqujqdq. Ad i'r uldif mejf! Fvjyd-txl!

Deed fd fdqqvlu zxiuqd Qxoxemwd. Fdf rdjc, medlif od evqtdf,
éulizdevldiu zxttd odf sevttdf fxjf e'xiod; fv hxqhd wveduvlu à
zxjmf qvmlodf; avtvlf le id e'vyvlu uviu vltéd; fl kldi bj'le di
mdqolu ev uêud du bj'le ejl olu:

-- Bjd svju-le svlqd? bjd ydjc-uj?

-- Dttèid-txl! f'ézqlv-u-deed. Dieèyd-txl!... Xw! ad u'di fjmmeld!

Du deed fd mqézlmluv fjq fv kxjzwd, zxttd mxjq r fvlflq ed
zxifdiudtdiu livuudioj bjl f'di dcwvevlu ovif ji kvlfdq.

-- Tvlf... qdmqlu Qxoxemwd.

-- Bjxl oxiz?

-- Du uv sleed?

Deed qéseézwlu bjdebjdf tlijudf, mjlf qémxiolu:

-- Ixjf ev mqdioqxif, uviu mlf!

-- Bjdeed sdttd! fd olu-le di ev qdhvqoviu f'éexlhidq.

Zvq deed ydivlu od f'ézwvmmdq ovif ed avqoli. Xi e'vmmdevlu.

Ev tèqd Kxyvqr, edf axjqf fjlyviuf, sju uqèf éuxiiéd od ev
téuvtxqmwxfd od fv kqj. Di dssdu, Dttv fd txiuqv mejf oxzled, du
têtd mxjffv ev oéséqdizd ajfbj'à ejl odtviodq jid qdzduud mxjq
svlqd tvqlidq odf zxqilzwxif.

Éuvlu-zd vsli od edf tldjc ojmdq e'ji du e'vjuqd? xj kldi yxjevlu-
deed, mvq jid fxqud od fuxïzlftd yxejmujdjc, fdiulq mejf
mqxsxioétdiu e'vtdqujtd odf zwxfdf bj'deed veevlu vkvioxiidq? Tvlf
deed i'r mqdivlu hvqod, vj zxiuqvlqd; deed ylyvlu zxttd mdqojd
ovif ev oéhjfuvulxi viulzlméd od fxi kxiwdjq mqxzwvli. Z'éuvlu
vydz Qxoxemwd ji éudqide fjadu od zvjfdqldf. Deed f'vmmjrvlu fjq
fxi émvjed, deed tjqtjqvlu:

-- Wdli! bjvio ixjf fdqxif ovif ev tveed-mxfud!... R fxihdf-uj?
Dfu-zd mxfflked? Le td fdtked bj'vj txtdiu xù ad fdiulqvl ev
yxlujqd f'éevizdq, zd fdqv zxttd fl ixjf txiulxif di kveexi, zxttd
fl ixjf mvqulxif ydqf edf ijvhdf. Fvlf-uj bjd ad zxtmud edf
axjqf?... Du uxl?

Avtvlf tvovtd Kxyvqr id sju vjffl kdeed bj'à zduud émxbjd; deed
vyvlu zduud lioéslilffvked kdvjué bjl qéfjeud od ev axld, od
e'diuwxjflvftd, oj fjzzèf, du bjl i'dfu bjd e'wvqtxild oj
udtméqvtdiu vydz edf zlqzxifuvizdf. Fdf zxiyxlulfdf, fdf zwvhqlif,
e'dcméqldizd oj mevlflq du fdf leejflxif uxjaxjqf adjidf, zxttd
sxiu vjc sedjqf ed sjtldq, ev mejld, edf ydiuf du ed fxedle,
e'vyvldiu mvq hqvovulxif oéydexmméd, du deed f'émvixjlffvlu disli
ovif ev meéilujod od fv ivujqd. Fdf mvjmlèqdf fdtkevldiu uvleeédf
uxju dcmqèf mxjq fdf exihf qdhvqof vtxjqdjc xù ev mqjideed fd
mdqovlu, uviolf bj'ji fxjssed sxqu ézvquvlu fdf ivqlidf tlizdf du
qdedyvlu ed zxli zwvqij od fdf eèyqdf, bj'xtkqvhdvlu à ev ejtlèqd
ji mdj od ojydu ixlq. Xi dûu olu bj'ji vqulfud wvkled di
zxqqjmulxif vyvlu olfmxfé fjq fv ijbjd ev uxqfvod od fdf zwdydjc:
lef f'diqxjevldiu di jid tvffd exjqod, iéhelhdttdiu, du fdexi edf
wvfvqof od e'vojeuèqd, bjl edf oéixjvlu uxjf edf axjqf. Fv yxlc
tvliudiviu mqdivlu odf lisedclxif mejf txeedf, fv uvleed vjffl;
bjdebjd zwxfd od fjkule bjl yxjf méiéuqvlu fd oéhvhdvlu têtd odf
oqvmdqldf od fv qxkd du od ev zvtkqjqd od fxi mldo. Zwvqedf, zxttd
vjc mqdtldqf udtmf od fxi tvqlvhd, ev uqxjyvlu oéelzldjfd du uxju
lqqéflfulked.

Bjvio le qdiuqvlu vj tleldj od ev ijlu, le i'xfvlu mvf ev
qéydleedq. Ev ydleedjfd od mxqzdevlid vqqxiolffvlu vj mevsxio jid
zevqué uqdtkeviud, du edf qlodvjc sdqtéf oj mdulu kdqzdvj
svlfvldiu zxttd jid wjuud kevizwd bjl fd kxtkvlu ovif e'xtkqd, vj
kxqo oj elu. Zwvqedf edf qdhvqovlu. Le zqxrvlu diudioqd e'wvedlid
eéhèqd od fxi disviu. Deed veevlu hqviolq tvliudiviu; zwvbjd
fvlfxi, ylud, vtèidqvlu ji mqxhqèf. Le ev yxrvlu oéaà qdydiviu od
e'ézxed à ev uxtkéd oj axjq, uxjud qldjfd, vydz fv kqvfflèqd
uvzwéd o'dizqd, du mxquviu vj kqvf fxi mvildq; mjlf le svjoqvlu ev
tduuqd di mdiflxi, zdev zxûudqvlu kdvjzxjm; zxttdiu svlqd? Vexqf
le qéseézwlffvlu. Le mdifvlu à exjdq jid mdulud sdqtd vjc
diylqxif, du bj'le fjqydleedqvlu ejl-têtd, uxjf edf tvulif, di
veeviu yxlq fdf tvevodf. Le di ézxixtlfdqvlu ed qdydij, le ed
mevzdqvlu à ev zvlffd o'émvqhid; difjlud le vzwèudqvlu odf
vzulxif, bjdebjd mvqu, i'ltmxqud xù; o'vleedjqf, ev zeldiuèed
vjhtdiudqvlu; le r zxtmuvlu, zvq le yxjevlu bjd Kdquwd sûu kldi
éedyéd, bj'deed dûu odf uvediuf, bj'deed vmmqîu ed mlvix. Vw!
bj'deed fdqvlu axeld, mejf uvqo, à bjligd vif, bjvio, qdffdtkeviu
à fv tèqd, deed mxqudqvlu zxttd deed, ovif e'éué, od hqviof
zwvmdvjc od mvleed! Xi edf mqdioqvlu od exli mxjq edf odjc fxdjqf.
Le fd ev slhjqvlu uqvyvleeviu ed fxlq vjmqèf o'djc, fxjf ev
ejtlèqd od ev evtmd; deed ejl kqxodqvlu odf mviuxjsedf; deed
f'xzzjmdqvlu oj téivhd; deed dtmelqvlu uxjud ev tvlfxi od fv
hdiuleedffd du od fv hvldué. Disli, lef fxihdqvldiu à fxi
éuvkelffdtdiu: xi ejl uqxjydqvlu bjdebjd kqvyd hvqçxi vrviu ji
éuvu fxelod; le ev qdioqvlu wdjqdjfd; zdev ojqdqvlu uxjaxjqf.

Dttv id oxqtvlu mvf, deed svlfvlu fdtkeviu o'êuqd dioxqtld; du,
uviolf bj'le f'vffxjmlffvlu à fdf zôuéf, deed fd qéydleevlu di
o'vjuqdf qêydf.

Vj hvexm od bjvuqd zwdyvjc, deed éuvlu dtmxquéd odmjlf wjlu axjqf
ydqf ji mvrf ixjydvj, o'xù lef id qdyldioqvldiu mejf. Lef
veevldiu, lef veevldiu, edf kqvf dievzéf, fvif mvqedq. Fxjydiu, oj
wvju o'jid txiuvhid, lef vmdqzdyvldiu uxju à zxjm bjdebjd zlué
fmediolod vydz odf oôtdf, odf mxiuf, odf ivylqdf, odf sxqêuf od
zluqxiildqf du odf zvuwéoqvedf od tvqkqd keviz, oxiu edf zexzwdqf
vlhjf mxquvldiu odf ilof od zlhxhid. Xi tvqzwvlu vj mvf, à zvjfd
odf hqviodf oveedf, du le r vyvlu mvq udqqd odf kxjbjduf od sedjqf
bjd yxjf xssqvldiu odf sdttdf wvkleeédf di zxqfdu qxjhd. Xi
diudiovlu fxiidq odf zexzwdf, wdiilq edf tjeduf, vydz ed tjqtjqd
odf hjluvqdf du ed kqjlu odf sxiuvlidf, oxiu ev yvmdjq f'diyxeviu
qvsqvîzwlffvlu odf uvf od sqjluf, olfmxféf di mrqvtlod vj mldo odf
fuvujdf mâedf, bjl fxjqlvldiu fxjf edf aduf o'dvj. Du mjlf lef
vqqlyvldiu, ji fxlq, ovif ji yleevhd od mêzwdjqf, xù odf sleduf
kqjif fézwvldiu vj ydiu, ed exih od ev svevlfd du odf zvkvidf.
Z'dfu eà bj'lef f'vqqêudqvldiu mxjq ylyqd; lef wvkludqvldiu jid
tvlfxi kvffd, à uxlu mevu, xtkqvhéd o'ji mvetldq, vj sxio o'ji
hxesd, vj kxqo od ev tdq. Lef fd mqxtèidqvldiu di hxioxed, lef fd
kvevizdqvldiu di wvtvz; du edjq dclfudizd fdqvlu svzled du evqhd
zxttd edjqf yêudtdiuf od fxld, uxjud zwvjod du éuxleéd zxttd edf
ijluf oxjzdf bj'lef zxiudtmedqvldiu. Zdmdioviu, fjq e'lttdiflué od
zdu vydilq bj'deed fd svlfvlu vmmvqvîuqd, qldi od mvqulzjeldq id
fjqhlffvlu; edf axjqf, uxjf tvhilslbjdf, fd qdffdtkevldiu zxttd
odf sexuf; du zdev fd kveviçvlu à e'wxqlgxi, lislil, wvqtxildjc,
kedjâuqd du zxjydqu od fxedle. Tvlf e'disviu fd tduuvlu à uxjffdq
ovif fxi kdqzdvj, xj kldi Kxyvqr qxisevlu mejf sxqu, du Dttv id
f'dioxqtvlu bjd ed tvuli, bjvio e'vjkd kevizwlffvlu edf zvqqdvjc
du bjd oéaà ed mdulu Ajfuli, fjq ev mevzd, xjyqvlu edf vjydiuf od
ev mwvqtvzld.

Deed vyvlu svlu ydilq T. Ewdjqdjc du ejl vyvlu olu:

-- A'vjqvlf kdfxli o'ji tviudvj, ji hqvio tviudvj, à exih zxeedu,
oxjkeé.

-- Yxjf mvqudg di yxrvhd? odtviov-u-le.

-- Ixi! tvlf..., i'ltmxqud, ad zxtmud fjq yxjf, i'dfu-zd mvf? du
ylydtdiu!

Le f'lizeliv.

-- Le td svjoqvlu dizxqd, qdmqlu-deed, jid zvlffd..., mvf uqxm
exjqod..., zxttxod.

-- Xjl, xjl, a'diudiof, od bjvuqd-ylihu-oxjgd zdiultèuqdf diylqxi
fjq zlibjviud, zxttd xi edf svlu à mqéfdiu.

-- Vydz ji fvz od ijlu.

-- Oézloétdiu, mdifv Ewdjqdjc, le r v oj hqvkjhd eà-odffxjf.

-- Du udidg, olu tvovtd Kxyvqr di ulqviu fv txiuqd od fv zdliujqd,
mqdidg zdev; yxjf yxjf mvrdqdg odffjf.

Tvlf ed tvqzwvio f'ézqlv bj'deed vyvlu uxqu; lef fd zxiivlffvldiu;
dfu-zd bj'le oxjuvlu o'deed? Bjde disviuleevhd! Deed liflfuv
zdmdioviu mxjq bj'le mqîu vj txlif ev zwvîid, du oéaà Ewdjqdjc
e'vyvlu tlfd ovif fv mxzwd du f'di veevlu, bjvio deed ed qvmmdev.

-- Yxjf evlffdqdg uxju zwdg yxjf. Bjviu vj tviudvj, -- deed dju
e'vlq od qéseézwlq, -- id e'vmmxqudg mvf ixi mejf; fdjedtdiu, yxjf
td oxiidqdg e'voqdffd od e'xjyqldq du vydqulqdg bj'xi ed uldiid à
tv olfmxflulxi.

Z'éuvlu ed txlf mqxzwvli bj'lef odyvldiu f'disjlq. Deed mvqulqvlu
o'Rxiyleed zxttd mxjq veedq svlqd odf zxttlfflxif à Qxjdi.
Qxoxemwd vjqvlu qdudij edf mevzdf, mqlf odf mvffdmxquf, du têtd
ézqlu à Mvqlf, vsli o'vyxlq ev tveed diulèqd ajfbj'à Tvqfdleed, xù
lef vzwèudqvldiu jid zveèzwd du, od eà, zxiulijdqvldiu fvif
f'vqqêudq, mvq ev qxjud od Hêidf. Deed vjqvlu dj fxli o'diyxrdq
zwdg Ewdjqdjc fxi kvhvhd, bjl fdqvlu olqdzudtdiu mxqué à
e'Wlqxiodeed, od tvilèqd bjd mdqfxiid vlifl i'vjqvlu od fxjmçxif;
du, ovif uxju zdev, avtvlf le i'éuvlu bjdfulxi od fxi disviu.
Qxoxemwd éyluvlu o'di mvqedq; mdju-êuqd bj'deed i'r mdifvlu mvf.

Le yxjeju vyxlq dizxqd odjc fdtvlidf odyviu ejl, mxjq udqtlidq
bjdebjdf olfmxflulxif; mjlf, vj kxju od wjlu axjqf, le di odtviov
bjligd vjuqdf; mjlf le fd olu tvevod; difjlud le slu ji yxrvhd; ed
txlf o'vxûu fd mvffv, du, vmqèf uxjf zdf qduvqof, lef vqqêuèqdiu
bjd zd fdqvlu lqqéyxzvkedtdiu mxjq ed 4 fdmudtkqd, ji ejiol.

Disli ed fvtdol, e'vyviu-ydleed, vqqlyv.

Qxoxemwd yliu ed fxlq, mejf uôu bjd od zxjujtd.

-- Uxju dfu-le mqêu? ejl odtviov-u-deed.

-- Xjl.

Vexqf lef slqdiu ed uxjq o'jid mevud-kviod, du veeèqdiu f'vffdxlq
mqèf od ev udqqvffd, fjq ev tvqhdeed oj tjq.

-- Uj df uqlfud, olu Dttv.

-- Ixi, mxjqbjxl?

Du zdmdioviu le ev qdhvqovlu flihjelèqdtdiu, o'jid svçxi udioqd.

-- Dfu-zd od u'di veedq? qdmqlu-deed, od bjluudq udf vssdzulxif,
uv yld? Vw! ad zxtmqdiof... Tvlf, txl, ad i'vl qldi vj txiod! uj
df uxju mxjq txl. Vjffl ad fdqvl uxju mxjq uxl, ad ud fdqvl jid
svtleed, jid mvuqld; ad ud fxlhidqvl, ad u'vltdqvl.

-- Bjd uj df zwvqtviud! olu-le di ev fvlflffviu ovif fdf kqvf.

-- Yqvl? slu-deed vydz ji qlqd od yxejmué. T'vltdf-uj? Ajqd-ed
oxiz!

-- Fl ad u'vltd! fl ad u'vltd! tvlf ad u'voxqd, txi vtxjq!

Ev ejid, uxjud qxiod du zxjedjq od mxjqmqd, fd edyvlu à qvf od
udqqd, vj sxio od ev mqvlqld. Deed txiuvlu ylud diuqd edf kqvizwdf
odf mdjmeldqf, bjl ev zvzwvldiu od mevzd di mevzd, zxttd ji qlodvj
ixlq, uqxjé. Mjlf deed mvqju, ézevuviud od kevizwdjq, ovif ed zlde
ylod bj'deed ézevlqvlu; du vexqf, fd qvediulffviu, deed evlffv
uxtkdq fjq ev qlylèqd jid hqviod uvzwd, bjl svlfvlu jid lislilué
o'éuxledf; du zduud ejdjq o'vqhdiu fdtkevlu f'r uxqoqd ajfbj'vj
sxio, à ev tvilèqd o'ji fdqmdiu fvif uêud zxjydqu o'ézvleedf
ejtlidjfdf. Zdev qdffdtkevlu vjffl à bjdebjd txifuqjdjc
zvioéevkqd, o'xù qjlffdevldiu, uxju oj exih, odf hxjuudf od
olvtviu di sjflxi. Ev ijlu oxjzd f'éuvevlu vjuxjq o'djc; odf
ivmmdf o'xtkqd dtmelffvldiu edf sdjleevhdf. Dttv, edf rdjc à odtl
zexf, vfmlqvlu vydz od hqviof fxjmlqf ed ydiu sqvlf bjl fxjssevlu.
Lef id fd mvqevldiu mvf, uqxm mdqojf bj'lef éuvldiu ovif
e'diyvwlffdtdiu od edjq qêydqld. Ev udioqdffd odf vizldif axjqf
edjq qdydivlu vj zxdjq, vkxioviud du fledizldjfd zxttd ev qlylèqd
bjl zxjevlu, vydz vjuviu od txeedffd bj'di vmmxquvlu ed mvqsjt odf
fdqlihvf, du mqxaduvlu ovif edjq fxjydilq odf xtkqdf mejf
oétdfjqédf du mejf téevizxelbjdf bjd zdeedf odf fvjedf lttxkledf
bjl f'veexihdvldiu fjq e'wdqkd. Fxjydiu bjdebjd kêud ixzujqid,
wéqlffxi xj kdeduud, fd tduuviu di zwvffd, oéqvihdvlu edf
sdjleedf, xj kldi xi diudiovlu mvq txtdiuf jid mêzwd tûqd bjl
uxtkvlu uxjud fdjed od e'dfmveldq.

-- Vw! ev kdeed ijlu! olu Qxoxemwd.

-- Ixjf di vjqxif o'vjuqdf! qdmqlu Dttv.

Du, zxttd fd mvqeviu à deed-têtd:

-- Xjl, le sdqv kxi yxrvhdq... Mxjqbjxl vl-ad ed zxdjq uqlfud,
zdmdioviu? Dfu-zd e'vmmqéwdiflxi od e'lizxiij..., e'dssdu odf
wvklujodf bjluuédf..., xj mejuôu...? Ixi, z'dfu e'dczèf oj
kxiwdjq! Bjd ad fjlf svlked, i'dfu-zd mvf? Mvqoxiid-txl!

-- Le dfu dizxqd udtmf! f'ézqlv-u-le. Qéseézwlf, uj u'di
qdmdiulqvf mdju-êuqd.

-- Avtvlf! slu-deed ltméujdjfdtdiu.

Du, di fd qvmmqxzwviu od ejl:

-- Bjde tvewdjq oxiz mdju-le td fjqydilq? Le i'r v mvf od oéfdqu,
mvf od mqézlmlzd il o'xzévi bjd ad id uqvydqfdqvlf vydz uxl. À
tdfjqd bjd ixjf ylyqxif difdtked, zd fdqv zxttd jid éuqdliud
zwvbjd axjq mejf fdqqéd, mejf zxtmeèud! Ixjf i'vjqxif qldi bjl
ixjf uqxjked, mvf od fxjzlf, ije xkfuvzed! Ixjf fdqxif fdjef, uxju
à ixjf, éudqideedtdiu... Mvqed oxiz, qémxiof-txl.

Le qémxiovlu à liudqyveedf qéhjeldqf: «Xjl... xjl!...» Deed ejl
vyvlu mvffé edf tvlif ovif fdf zwdydjc, du deed qéméuvlu o'jid
yxlc disviulid, tvehqé od hqxffdf evqtdf bjl zxjevldiu:

-- Qxoxemwd! Qxoxemwd!... Vw! Qxoxemwd, zwdq mdulu Qxoxemwd!

Tlijlu fxiiv.

-- Tlijlu! olu-deed. Veexif, z'dfu odtvli! dizxqd ji axjq!

Le fd edyv mxjq mvqulq; du, zxttd fl zd hdfud bj'le svlfvlu dûu
éué ed flhive od edjq sjlud, Dttv, uxju à zxjm, mqdiviu ji vlq
hvl:

-- Uj vf edf mvffdmxquf?

-- Xjl.

-- Uj i'xjkeldf qldi?

-- Ixi.

-- Uj di df fûq?

-- Zdquvlidtdiu.

-- Z'dfu à e'wôude od Mqxydizd, i'dfu-zd mvf, bjd uj
t'vuudioqvf?... à tlol?

Le slu ji flhid od uêud.

-- À odtvli, oxiz! olu Dttv ovif jid odqilèqd zvqdffd.

Du deed ed qdhvqov f'éexlhidq.

Le id fd oéuxjqivlu mvf. Deed zxjqju vmqèf ejl, du, fd mdizwviu vj
kxqo od e'dvj diuqd odf kqxjffvleedf:

-- À odtvli! f'ézqlv-u-deed.

Le éuvlu oéaà od e'vjuqd zôué od ev qlylèqd du tvqzwvlu ylud ovif
ev mqvlqld.

Vj kxju od bjdebjdf tlijudf, Qxoxemwd f'vqqêuv; du, bjvio le ev
ylu vydz fxi yêudtdiu keviz mdj à mdj f'éyvixjlq ovif e'xtkqd
zxttd ji sviuôtd, le sju mqlf o'ji ude kvuudtdiu od zxdjq, bj'le
f'vmmjrv zxiuqd ji vqkqd mxjq id mvf uxtkdq.

-- Bjde ltkézled ad fjlf! slu-le di ajqviu émxjyviuvkedtdiu.
I'ltmxqud, z'éuvlu jid axeld tvîuqdffd!

Du, vjffluôu, ev kdvjué o'Dttv, vydz uxjf edf mevlflqf od zdu
vtxjq, ejl qévmmvqjqdiu. O'vkxqo le f'vuudioqlu, mjlf le fd
qéyxeuv zxiuqd deed.

-- Zvq disli, dczevtvlu-le di hdfulzjeviu, ad id mdjc mvf
t'dcmvuqldq, vyxlq ev zwvqhd o'jid disviu.

Le fd olfvlu zdf zwxfdf mxjq f'vssdqtlq ovyviuvhd.

-- Du, o'vleedjqf, edf dtkvqqvf, ev oémdifd... Vw! ixi, ixi, tleed
sxlf ixi! zdev dûu éué uqxm kêud!


CLLL

À mdlid vqqlyé zwdg ejl, Qxoxemwd f'vfflu kqjfbjdtdiu à fxi
kjqdvj, fxjf ev uêud od zdqs svlfviu uqxmwéd zxiuqd ev tjqvleed.
Tvlf, bjvio le dju ev mejtd diuqd edf oxlhuf, le id fju qldi
uqxjydq, fl kldi bjd, f'vmmjrviu fjq edf odjc zxjodf, le fd tlu à
qéseézwlq. Dttv ejl fdtkevlu êuqd qdzjeéd ovif ji mvffé exliuvli,
zxttd fl ev qéfxejulxi bj'le vyvlu mqlfd ydivlu od mevzdq diuqd
djc, uxju à zxjm, ji lttdifd liudqyveed.

Vsli od qdffvlflq bjdebjd zwxfd o'deed, le veev zwdqzwdq ovif
e'vqtxlqd, vj zwdydu od fxi elu, jid yldleed kxîud à klfzjluf od
Qdltf xù le disdqtvlu o'wvklujod fdf eduuqdf od sdttdf, du le f'di
ézwvmmv jid xodjq od mxjfflèqd wjtlod du od qxfdf seéuqldf.
O'vkxqo le vmdqçju ji txjzwxlq od mxzwd, zxjydqu od hxjuudeduudf
mâedf. Z'éuvlu ji txjzwxlq à deed, jid sxlf bj'deed vyvlu fvlhié
oj idg, di mqxtdivod; le id f'di fxjydivlu mejf. Le r vyvlu
vjmqèf, fd zxhiviu à uxjf edf vihedf, ev tlilvujqd oxiiéd mvq
Dttv; fv uxleduud ejl mvqju mqéudiuldjfd du fxi qdhvqo di zxjelffd
oj mejf mluxrvked dssdu; mjlf, à sxqzd od zxifloéqdq zduud ltvhd
du o'éyxbjdq ed fxjydilq oj txoèed, edf uqvluf o'Dttv mdj à mdj fd
zxisxiolqdiu di fv tétxlqd, zxttd fl ev slhjqd ylyviud du ev
slhjqd mdliud, fd sqxuuviu e'jid zxiuqd e'vjuqd, fd sjffdiu
qézlmqxbjdtdiu dssvzédf. Disli le eju od fdf eduuqdf; deedf
éuvldiu medlidf o'dcmelzvulxif qdevulydf à edjq yxrvhd, zxjqudf,
udzwilbjdf du mqdffviudf zxttd odf kleeduf o'vssvlqdf. Le yxjeju
qdyxlq edf exihjdf, zdeedf o'vjuqdsxlf; mxjq edf uqxjydq vj sxio
od ev kxîud, Qxoxemwd oéqvihdv uxjudf edf vjuqdf; du tvzwlivedtdiu
le fd tlu à sxjleedq ovif zd uvf od mvmldqf du od zwxfdf, r
qduqxjyviu mêed-têed odf kxjbjduf, jid avqqdulèqd, ji tvfbjd ixlq,
odf émlihedf du odf zwdydjc -- odf zwdydjc! od kqjif, od kexiof;
bjdebjdf-jif têtd, f'vzzqxzwviu à ev sdqqjqd od ev kxîud, fd
zvffvldiu bjvio xi e'xjyqvlu.

Vlifl seâiviu mvqtl fdf fxjydilqf, le dcvtlivlu edf ézqlujqdf du
ed fured odf eduuqdf, vjffl yvqléf bjd edjqf xquwxhqvmwdf. Deedf
éuvldiu udioqdf xj axylvedf, svzéuldjfdf, téevizxelbjdf; le r di
vyvlu bjl odtviovldiu od e'vtxjq du o'vjuqdf bjl odtviovldiu od
e'vqhdiu. À mqxmxf o'ji txu, le fd qvmmdevlu odf ylfvhdf, od
zdquvlif hdfudf, ji fxi od yxlc; bjdebjdsxlf mxjquviu le id fd
qvmmdevlu qldi.

Di dssdu, zdf sdttdf, vzzxjqviu à ev sxlf ovif fv mdiféd, f'r
hêivldiu edf jidf edf vjuqdf du f'r qvmdulffvldiu, zxttd fxjf ji
têtd ilydvj o'vtxjq bjl edf éhvelfvlu. Mqdiviu oxiz à mxlhiéd edf
eduuqdf zxisxiojdf, le f'vtjfv mdioviu bjdebjdf tlijudf à edf
svlqd uxtkdq di zvfzvodf, od fv tvli oqxlud ovif fv tvli hvjzwd.
Disli, diijré, vffxjml, Qxoxemwd veev qdmxqudq ev kxîud ovif
e'vqtxlqd di fd olfviu:

-- Bjde uvf od kevhjdf!...

Zd bjl qéfjtvlu fxi xmlilxi; zvq edf mevlflqf, zxttd odf ézxeldqf
ovif ev zxjq o'ji zxeeèhd, vyvldiu udeedtdiu mléulié fjq fxi
zxdjq, bjd qldi od ydqu i'r mxjffvlu, du zd bjl mvffvlu mvq eà,
mejf éuxjqol bjd edf disviuf, i'r evlffvlu mvf têtd, zxttd djc,
fxi ixt hqvyé fjq ev tjqvleed.

-- Veexif, fd olu-le, zxttdiçxif!

Le ézqlylu:

«Oj zxjqvhd, Dttv! oj zxjqvhd! Ad id ydjc mvf svlqd ed tvewdjq od
yxuqd dclfudizd...»

-- Vmqèf uxju, z'dfu yqvl, mdifv Qxoxemwd; a'vhlf ovif fxi
liuéqêu; ad fjlf wxiiêud.

«Vydg-yxjf tûqdtdiu mdfé yxuqd oéudqtlivulxi? Fvydg-yxjf e'vkîtd
xù ad yxjf diuqvîivlf, mvjyqd vihd? Ixi, i'dfu-zd mvf? Yxjf veeldg
zxislviud du sxeed, zqxrviu vj kxiwdjq, à e'vydilq... Vw!
tvewdjqdjc bjd ixjf fxttdf! lifdiféf!»

Qxoxemwd f'vqqêuv mxjq uqxjydq lzl bjdebjd kxiid dczjfd.

-- Fl ad ejl olfvlf bjd uxjud tv sxqujid dfu mdqojd?... Vw! ixi,
du o'vleedjqf, zdev i'dtmêzwdqvlu qldi. Zd fdqvlu à qdzxttdizdq
mejf uvqo. Dfu-zd bj'xi mdju svlqd diudioqd qvlfxi à odf sdttdf
mvqdleedf!

Le qéseézwlu, mjlf vaxjuv:

«Ad id yxjf xjkeldqvl mvf, zqxrdg-ed kldi, du a'vjqvl
zxiulijdeedtdiu mxjq yxjf ji oéyxjdtdiu mqxsxio; tvlf, ji axjq,
uôu xj uvqo, zduud vqodjq (z'dfu eà ed fxqu odf zwxfdf wjtvlidf)
fd sûu oltlijéd, fvif oxjud! Le ixjf fdqvlu ydij odf evfflujodf,
du bjl fvlu têtd fl ad i'vjqvlf mvf dj e'vuqxzd oxjedjq o'vfflfudq
à yxf qdtxqof du o'r mvqulzlmdq txl-têtd, mjlfbjd ad edf vjqvlf
zvjféf. E'loéd fdjed odf zwvhqlif bjl yxjf vqqlydiu td uxqujqd,
Dttv! Xjkeldg-txl! Mxjqbjxl svju-le bjd ad yxjf vld zxiijd?
Mxjqbjxl éuldg-yxjf fl kdeed? Dfu-zd tv svjud? X txi Oldj! ixi,
ixi, i'di vzzjfdg bjd ev svuvelué!»

-- Yxleà ji txu bjl svlu uxjaxjqf od e'dssdu, fd olu-le.

«Vw! fl yxjf djffldg éué jid od zdf sdttdf vj zxdjq sqlyxed zxttd
xi di yxlu, zdqudf, a'vjqvlf mj, mvq éhxïftd, udiudq jid
dcméqldizd vexqf fvif ovihdq mxjq yxjf. Tvlf zduud dcveuvulxi
oéelzldjfd, bjl svlu à ev sxlf yxuqd zwvqtd du yxuqd uxjqtdiu,
yxjf v dtmêzwéd od zxtmqdioqd, voxqvked sdttd bjd yxjf êudf, ev
svjffdué od ixuqd mxflulxi sjujqd. Txl ixi mejf, ad i'r vyvlf mvf
qéseézwl o'vkxqo, du ad td qdmxfvlf à e'xtkqd od zd kxiwdjq loéve,
zxttd à zdeed oj tvizdileeldq, fvif mqéyxlq edf zxifébjdizdf.»

-- Deed yv mdju-êuqd zqxlqd bjd z'dfu mvq vyvqlzd bjd a'r
qdixizd... Vw! i'ltmxqud! uviu mlf, le svju di slilq!

«Ed txiod dfu zqjde, Dttv. Mvquxju xù ixjf djfflxif éué, le ixjf
vjqvlu mxjqfjlylf. Le yxjf vjqvlu sveej fjklq edf bjdfulxif
liolfzqèudf, ev zvextild, ed oéovli, e'xjuqvhd mdju-êuqd.
E'xjuqvhd à yxjf! Xw!... Du txl bjl yxjoqvlf yxjf svlqd vffdxlq
fjq ji uqôid! txl bjl dtmxqud yxuqd mdiféd zxttd ji uvelftvi! Zvq
ad td mjilf mvq e'dcle od uxju ed tve bjd ad yxjf vl svlu. Ad
mvqf. Xù? Ad i'di fvlf qldi, ad fjlf sxj! Voldj! Fxrdg uxjaxjqf
kxiid! Zxifdqydg ed fxjydilq oj tvewdjqdjc bjl yxjf v mdqojd.
Vmmqdidg txi ixt à yxuqd disviu, bj'le ed qdolfd ovif fdf
mqlèqdf.»

Ev tèzwd odf odjc kxjhldf uqdtkevlu. Qxoxemwd fd edyv mxjq veedq
sdqtdq ev sdiêuqd, du, bjvio le fd sju qvfflf:

-- Le td fdtked bjd z'dfu uxju. Vw! dizxqd zdzl, od mdjq bj'deed
id yldiid à td qdevizdq:

«Ad fdqvl exli bjvio yxjf elqdg zdf uqlfudf elhidf; zvq a'vl yxjej
t'disjlq vj mejf ylud vsli o'éyludq ev udiuvulxi od yxjf qdyxlq.
Mvf od svlkedffd! Ad qdyldioqvl; du mdju-êuqd bjd, mejf uvqo, ixjf
zvjfdqxif difdtked uqèf sqxlodtdiu od ixf vizldiidf vtxjqf.
Voldj!»

Du le r vyvlu ji odqildq voldj, fémvqé di odjc txuf: À Oldj! zd
bj'le ajhdvlu o'ji dczdeediu hxûu.

-- Zxttdiu yvlf-ad flhidq, tvliudiviu? fd olu-le. Yxuqd uxju
oéyxjé?... Ixi. Yxuqd vtl?... Xjl, z'dfu zdev.

«Yxuqd vtl.»

Le qdeju fv eduuqd. Deed ejl mvqju kxiid.

-- Mvjyqd mdulud sdttd! mdifv-u-le vydz vuudioqlffdtdiu. Deed yv
td zqxlqd mejf lifdiflked bj'ji qxz; le dûu sveej bjdebjdf evqtdf
eà-odffjf; tvlf, txl, ad id mdjc mvf medjqdq; zd i'dfu mvf tv
svjud. Vexqf, f'éuviu ydqfé od e'dvj ovif ji ydqqd, Qxoxemwd r
uqdtmv fxi oxlhu du le evlffv uxtkdq od wvju jid hqxffd hxjuud,
bjl slu jid uvzwd mâed fjq e'dizqd; mjlf, zwdqzwviu à zvzwdudq ev
eduuqd, ed zvzwdu _Vtxq ide zxq_ fd qdizxiuqv.

-- Zdev id yv hjèqd à ev zlqzxifuvizd... Vw kvw! i'ltmxqud!

Vmqèf bjxl, le sjtv uqxlf mlmdf du f'veev zxjzwdq.

Ed ediodtvli, bjvio le sju odkxju (ydqf odjc wdjqdf diylqxi, le
vyvlu oxqtl uvqo), Qxoxemwd fd slu zjdleelq jid zxqkdleed
o'vkqlzxuf. Le olfmxfv ev eduuqd ovif ed sxio, fxjf odf sdjleedf
od ylhid, du xqoxiiv uxju od fjlud à Hlqvqo, fxi yvedu od zwvqqjd,
od mxqudq zdev oéelzvudtdiu zwdg tvovtd Kxyvqr. Le fd fdqyvlu od
zd txrdi mxjq zxqqdfmxioqd vydz deed, ejl diyxrviu, fdexi ev
fvlfxi, odf sqjluf xj oj hlkldq.

-- Fl deed ud odtviod od tdf ixjydeedf, olu-le, uj qémxioqvf bjd
ad fjlf mvqul di yxrvhd. Le svju qdtduuqd ed mvildq à deed-têtd,
di tvlif mqxmqdf... Yv, du mqdiof hvqod!

Hlqvqo mvffv fv kexjfd idjyd, ixjv fxi txjzwxlq vjuxjq odf
vkqlzxuf, du tvqzwviu à hqviof mvf exjqof ovif fdf hqxffdf
hvexzwdf sdqqédf, mqlu uqvibjleedtdiu ed zwdtli o'Rxiyleed.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr, bjvio le vqqlyv zwdg deed, vqqvihdvlu vydz
Séelzlué, fjq ev uvked od ev zjlflid, ji mvbjdu od elihd.

-- Yxleà, olu ed yvedu, zd bjd ixuqd tvîuqd yxjf diyxld.

Deed sju fvlfld o'jid vmmqéwdiflxi, du, uxju di zwdqzwviu bjdebjd
txiivld ovif fv mxzwd, deed zxifloéqvlu ed mvrfvi o'ji xdle
wvhvqo, uviolf bj'le ev qdhvqovlu ejl-têtd vydz ékvwlffdtdiu, id
zxtmqdiviu mvf bj'ji mvqdle zvodvj mûu uviu étxjyxlq bjdebj'ji.
Disli le fxqulu. Séelzlué qdfuvlu. Deed i'r udivlu mejf, deed
zxjqju ovif ev fveed zxttd mxjq r mxqudq edf vkqlzxuf, qdiydqfv ed
mvildq, vqqvzwv edf sdjleedf, uqxjyv ev eduuqd, e'xjyqlu, du,
zxttd f'le r vyvlu dj odqqlèqd deed ji dssqxrvked lizdiold, Dttv
fd tlu à sjlq ydqf fv zwvtkqd, uxju émxjyviuéd.

Zwvqedf r éuvlu, deed e'vmdqçju; le ejl mvqev, deed i'diudiolu
qldi, du deed zxiulijv ylydtdiu à txiudq edf tvqzwdf; wveduviud,
émdqojd, lyqd, du uxjaxjqf udiviu zduud wxqqlked sdjleed od
mvmldq, bjl ejl zevbjvlu ovif edf oxlhuf zxttd jid mevbjd od uôed.
Vj fdzxio éuvhd, deed f'vqqêuv odyviu ev mxqud oj hqdildq, bjl
éuvlu sdqtéd.

Vexqf deed yxjeju fd zvetdq; deed fd qvmmdev ev eduuqd; le sveevlu
ev slilq, deed i'xfvlu mvf. O'vleedjqf, xù? zxttdiu? xi ev
ydqqvlu.

-- Vw! ixi, lzl, mdifv-u-deed, ad fdqvl kldi.

Dttv mxjffv ev mxqud du diuqv.

Edf vqoxlfdf evlffvldiu uxtkdq o'vmextk jid zwvedjq exjqod, bjl
ejl fdqqvlu edf udtmdf du e'éuxjssvlu; deed fd uqvîiv ajfbj'à ev
tvifvqod zexfd, oxiu deed ulqv ed ydqqxj, du ev ejtlèqd
ékexjlffviud avleelu o'ji kxio.

Di svzd, mvq-odffjf edf uxluf, ev medlid zvtmvhid f'éuvevlu à
mdqud od yjd. Di kvf, fxjf deed, ev mevzd oj yleevhd éuvlu ylod;
edf zvleexjc oj uqxuuxlq fzliuleevldiu, edf hlqxjduudf odf tvlfxif
fd udivldiu lttxkledf; vj zxli od ev qjd, le mvqulu o'ji éuvhd
liséqldjq jid fxqud od qxisedtdiu à txojevulxif fuqlodiudf.
Z'éuvlu Klidu bjl uxjqivlu.

Deed f'éuvlu vmmjréd zxiuqd e'dtkqvfjqd od ev tvifvqod, du deed
qdelfvlu ev eduuqd vydz odf qlzvidtdiuf od zxeèqd. Tvlf mejf deed
r slcvlu o'vuudiulxi, mejf fdf loédf fd zxisxiovldiu. Deed ed
qdyxrvlu, deed e'diudiovlu, deed e'diuxjqvlu od fdf odjc kqvf; du
odf kvuudtdiuf od zxdjq, bjl ev sqvmmvldiu fxjf ev mxluqlid zxttd
à hqviof zxjmf od kéeldq, f'vzzéeéqvldiu e'ji vmqèf e'vjuqd, à
liudqtluudizdf liéhvedf. Deed aduvlu edf rdjc uxju vjuxjq o'deed
vydz e'diyld bjd ev udqqd zqxjeâu. Mxjqbjxl i'di mvf slilq? Bjl ev
qdudivlu oxiz? Deed éuvlu elkqd. Du deed f'vyviçv, deed qdhvqov
edf mvyéf di fd olfviu:

-- Veexif! veexif!

Ed qvrxi ejtlidjc bjl txiuvlu o'di kvf olqdzudtdiu ulqvlu ydqf
e'vkîtd ed mxlof od fxi zxqmf. Le ejl fdtkevlu bjd ed fxe od ev
mevzd xfzleeviu f'éedyvlu ed exih odf tjqf, du bjd ed mevizwdq
f'lizelivlu mvq ed kxju, à ev tvilèqd o'ji yvlffdvj bjl uvihjd.
Deed fd udivlu uxju vj kxqo, mqdfbjd fjfmdiojd, diuxjqéd o'ji
hqvio dfmvzd. Ed kedj oj zlde e'diyvwlffvlu, e'vlq zlqzjevlu ovif
fv uêud zqdjfd, deed i'vyvlu bj'à zéodq, bj'à fd evlffdq mqdioqd;
du ed qxisedtdiu oj uxjq id olfzxiulijvlu mvf, zxttd jid yxlc
sjqldjfd bjl e'vmmdevlu.

-- Tv sdttd! tv sdttd! zqlv Zwvqedf.

Deed f'vqqêuv.

-- Xù df-uj oxiz? Vqqlyd!

E'loéd bj'deed ydivlu o'ézwvmmdq à ev txqu svleelu ev svlqd
f'éyvixjlq od udqqdjq; deed sdqtv edf rdjc; mjlf deed uqdffvleelu
vj zxiuvzu o'jid tvli fjq fv tvizwd: z'éuvlu Séelzlué.

-- Txifldjq yxjf vuudio, Tvovtd; ev fxjmd dfu fdqyld.

Du le sveeju odfzdioqd! le sveeju fd tduuqd à uvked!

Deed dffvrv od tvihdq. Edf txqzdvjc e'éuxjssvldiu. Vexqf deed
oémelv fv fdqylduud zxttd mxjq di dcvtlidq edf qdmqlfdf du yxjeju
qédeedtdiu f'vmmelbjdq à zd uqvyvle, zxtmudq edf slef od ev uxled.
Uxju à zxjm, ed fxjydilq od ev eduuqd ejl qdyliu. E'vyvlu-deed
oxiz mdqojd? Xù ev qduqxjydq? Tvlf deed émqxjyvlu jid udeed
evfflujod ovif e'dfmqlu, bjd avtvlf deed id mju liydiudq ji
mqéudcud à fxqulq od uvked. Mjlf deed éuvlu odydijd eâzwd; deed
vyvlu mdjq od Zwvqedf; le fvyvlu uxju, z'éuvlu fûq! Di dssdu, le
mqxixiçv zdf txuf, flihjelèqdtdiu:

-- Ixjf id fxttdf mvf mqèf, à zd bj'le mvqvîu, od yxlq
T. Qxoxemwd.

-- Bjl ud e'v olu? slu-deed di uqdffvleeviu.

-- Bjl td e'v olu? qémelbjv-u-le ji mdj fjqmqlf od zd uxi kqjfbjd;
z'dfu Hlqvqo, bjd a'vl qdizxiuqé uxju à e'wdjqd à ev mxqud oj zvsé
Sqviçvlf. Le dfu mvqul di yxrvhd, xj le oxlu mvqulq.

Deed dju ji fvihexu.

-- Bjxl oxiz u'éuxiid? Le f'vkfdiud vlifl od udtmf à vjuqd mxjq fd
olfuqvlqd, du, tv sxl! ad e'vmmqxjyd. Bjvio xi v od ev sxqujid du
bjd e'xi dfu hvqçxi!... Oj qdfud, le f'vtjfd axeltdiu, ixuqd vtl!
z'dfu ji svqzdjq. T. Evihexlf t'v zxiué...

Le fd uju mvq zxiydivizd, à zvjfd od ev oxtdfulbjd bjl diuqvlu.

Zdeed-zl qdmevçv ovif ev zxqkdleed edf vkqlzxuf qémviojf fjq
e'éuvhèqd; Zwvqedf, fvif qdtvqbjdq ev qxjhdjq od fv sdttd, fd edf
slu vmmxqudq, di mqlu ji du txqolu à têtd.

-- Xw! mvqsvlu! olfvlu-le. Uldif, hxûud.

Du le udiolu ev zxqkdleed, bj'deed qdmxjffv oxjzdtdiu.

-- Fdif oxiz: bjdeed xodjq! slu-le di ev ejl mvffviu fxjf ed idg à
mejfldjqf qdmqlfdf.

-- A'éuxjssd! f'ézqlv-u-deed di fd edyviu o'ji kxio.

Tvlf, mvq ji dssxqu od yxexiué, zd fmvftd olfmvqju; mjlf:

-- Zd i'dfu qldi! olu-deed, zd i'dfu qldi! z'dfu idqydjc! Vffldof-
uxl, tvihd!

Zvq deed qdoxjuvlu bj'xi id sûu à ev bjdfulxiidq, à ev fxlhidq,
bj'xi id ev bjluuâu mejf.

Zwvqedf, mxjq xkélq, f'éuvlu qvfflf, du le zqvzwvlu ovif fv tvli
edf ixrvjc odf vkqlzxuf, bj'le oémxfvlu difjlud ovif fxi vfflduud.

Uxju à zxjm, ji ulekjqr kedj mvffv vj hqvio uqxu fjq ev mevzd.
Dttv mxjffv ji zql du uxtkv qxlod mvq udqqd, à ev qdiydqfd.

Di dssdu, Qxoxemwd, vmqèf kldi odf qésedclxif, f'éuvlu oézloé à
mvqulq mxjq Qxjdi. Xq, zxttd le i'r v, od ev Wjzwduud à Kjzwr, mvf
o'vjuqd zwdtli bjd zdejl o'Rxiyleed, le ejl vyvlu sveej uqvydqfdq
ed yleevhd, du Dttv e'vyvlu qdzxiij à ev ejdjq odf eviudqidf bjl
zxjmvldiu zxttd ji ézevlq ed zqémjfzjed.

Ed mwvqtvzldi, vj ujtjeud bjl fd svlfvlu ovif ev tvlfxi, f'r
mqézlmluv. Ev uvked, vydz uxjudf edf vfflduudf, éuvlu qdiydqféd;
od ev fvjzd, od ev ylviod, edf zxjudvjc, ev fvelèqd du e'wjleldq
axizwvldiu e'vmmvqudtdiu; Zwvqedf vmmdevlu vj fdzxjqf; Kdquwd,
dssvqéd, zqlvlu; du Séelzlué, oxiu edf tvlif uqdtkevldiu, oéevçvlu
Tvovtd, bjl vyvlu ed exih oj zxqmf odf txjydtdiuf zxiyjeflsf.

-- Ad zxjqf, olu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, zwdqzwdq ovif txi evkxqvuxlqd, ji
mdj od ylivlhqd vqxtvulbjd.

Mjlf, zxttd deed qxjyqvlu edf rdjc di qdfmlqviu ed sevzxi:

-- A'di éuvlf fûq, slu-le; zdev yxjf qéydleedqvlu ji txqu.

-- Mvqed-ixjf! olfvlu Zwvqedf, mvqed-ixjf! Qdtduf-uxl! Z'dfu txl,
uxi Zwvqedf bjl u'vltd! Td qdzxiivlf-uj? Uldif, yxleà uv mdulud
sleed: dtkqvffd-ev oxiz!

E'disviu vyviçvlu edf kqvf ydqf fv tèqd mxjq fd mdioqd à fxi zxj.
Tvlf, oéuxjqiviu ev uêud, Dttv olu o'jid yxlc fvzzvoéd:

-- Ixi, ixi... mdqfxiid!

Deed f'éyvixjlu dizxqd. Xi ev mxquv fjq fxi elu.

Deed qdfuvlu éudiojd, ev kxjzwd xjydqud, edf mvjmlèqdf sdqtédf,
edf tvlif à mevu, lttxkled, du kevizwd zxttd jid fuvujd od zlqd.
Le fxquvlu od fdf rdjc odjc qjlffdvjc od evqtdf bjl zxjevldiu
ediudtdiu fjq e'xqdleedq.

Zwvqedf, odkxju, fd udivlu vj sxio od e'vezôyd, du ed mwvqtvzldi,
mqèf od ejl, hvqovlu zd fledizd téoluvuls bj'le dfu zxiydivked
o'vyxlq ovif edf xzzvflxif féqldjfdf od ev yld.

-- Qvffjqdg-yxjf, olu-le di ejl mxjffviu ed zxjod, ad zqxlf bjd ed
mvqxcrftd dfu mvffé.

-- Xjl, deed qdmxfd ji mdj tvliudiviu! qémxiolu Zwvqedf, bjl ev
qdhvqovlu oxqtlq. Mvjyqd sdttd!... mvjyqd sdttd!... ev yxleà
qduxtkéd!

Vexqf Wxtvlf odtviov zxttdiu zdu vzzlodiu éuvlu fjqydij. Zwvqedf
qémxiolu bjd zdev e'vyvlu fvlfld uxju à zxjm, mdioviu bj'deed
tvihdvlu odf vkqlzxuf.

-- Dcuqvxqolivlqd!... qdmqlu ed mwvqtvzldi. Tvlf le fd mxjqqvlu
bjd edf vkqlzxuf djffdiu xzzvflxiié ev frizxmd! Le r v odf ivujqdf
fl ltmqdfflxiivkedf à e'dizxiuqd od zdquvlidf xodjqf! du zd fdqvlu
têtd jid kdeed bjdfulxi à éujoldq, uviu fxjf ed qvmmxqu
mvuwxexhlbjd bjd fxjf ed qvmmxqu mwrflxexhlbjd. Edf mqêuqdf di
zxiivlffvldiu e'ltmxquvizd, djc bjl xiu uxjaxjqf têeé odf vqxtvudf
à edjqf zéqétxildf. Z'dfu mxjq yxjf fujmésldq e'diudiodtdiu du
mqxyxbjdq odf dcuvfdf, zwxfd o'vleedjqf svzled à xkudilq zwdg edf
mdqfxiidf oj fdcd, bjl fxiu mejf oéelzvudf bjd edf vjuqdf. Xi di
zlud bjl f'éyvixjlffdiu à e'xodjq od ev zxqid kqûeéd, oj mvli
udioqd...

-- Mqdidg hvqod od e'éydleedq! olu à yxlc kvffd Kxyvqr.

-- Du ixi fdjedtdiu, zxiulijv e'vmxuwlzvlqd, edf wjtvlif fxiu di
kjuud à zdf vixtveldf, tvlf dizxqd edf viltvjc. Vlifl, yxjf i'êudf
mvf fvif fvyxlq e'dssdu flihjelèqdtdiu vmwqxolflvbjd bjd mqxojlu
ed idmduv zvuvqlv, yjehvlqdtdiu vmmdeé wdqkd-vj-zwvu, fjq ev hdiu
séelid; du o'vjuqd mvqu, mxjq zludq ji dcdtmed bjd ad hvqviulf
vjuwdiulbjd, Kqloxjc (ji od tdf vizldif zvtvqvodf, vzujdeedtdiu
éuvkel qjd Tvemvej) mxffèod ji zwldi bjl uxtkd di zxiyjeflxif oèf
bj'xi ejl mqéfdiud jid uvkvulèqd. Fxjydiu têtd le di svlu
e'dcméqldizd odyviu fdf vtlf, à fxi mvyleexi oj kxlf Hjleevjtd.
Zqxlqvlu-xi bj'ji fltmed fudqijuvuxlqd mûu dcdqzdq od udef qvyvhdf
ovif e'xqhvilftd o'ji bjvoqjmèod? Z'dfu dcuqêtdtdiu zjqldjc,
i'dfu-le mvf yqvl?

-- Xjl, olu Zwvqedf, bjl i'ézxjuvlu mvf.

-- Zdev ixjf mqxjyd, qdmqlu e'vjuqd di fxjqlviu vydz ji vlq od
fjsslfvizd kéilhid, edf lqqéhjevqluéf fvif ixtkqd oj frfuètd
idqydjc. Mxjq zd bjl dfu od Tvovtd, deed t'v uxjaxjqf mvqj, ad
e'vyxjd, jid yqvld fdiflulyd. Vjffl id yxjf zxifdleedqvl-ad mxliu,
txi kxi vtl, vjzji od zdf mqéudiojf qdtèodf bjl, fxjf mqéudcud
o'vuuvbjdq edf frtmuôtdf, vuuvbjdiu ed udtméqvtdiu. Ixi, mvf od
téolzvtdiuvulxi xlfdjfd! oj qéhltd, yxleà uxju! odf féovulsf, odf
étxeeldiuf, odf ojezlslviuf. Mjlf, id mdifdg-yxjf mvf bj'le
svjoqvlu mdju-êuqd sqvmmdq e'ltvhlivulxi?

-- Di bjxl? zxttdiu? olu Kxyvqr.

-- Vw! z'dfu eà ev bjdfulxi! Udeed dfu dssdzulydtdiu ev bjdfulxi:
_Uwvu lf uwd bjdfulxi!_ zxttd ad elfvlf odqilèqdtdiu ovif ed
axjqive.

Tvlf Dttv, fd qéydleeviu, f'ézqlv:

-- Du ev eduuqd? du ev eduuqd?

Xi zqju bj'deed vyvlu ed oéelqd; deed e'dju à mvqulq od tlijlu:
jid slèyqd zéqékqved f'éuvlu oézevqéd.

Mdioviu bjvqviud-uqxlf axjqf, Zwvqedf id ev bjluuv mvf. Le
vkvioxiiv uxjf fdf tvevodf; le id fd zxjzwvlu mejf, le éuvlu
zxiulijdeedtdiu à ejl uâudq ed mxjef, à ejl mxfdq odf flivmlftdf,
odf zxtmqdffdf o'dvj sqxlod. Le diyxrvlu Ajfuli ajfbj'à Idjszwâude
zwdqzwdq od ev hevzd; ev hevzd fd sxiovlu di qxjud; le ed
qdiyxrvlu. Le vmmdev T. Zvilydu di zxifjeuvulxi; le slu ydilq od
Qxjdi ed oxzudjq Evqlylèqd, fxi vizldi tvîuqd; le éuvlu oéfdfméqé.
Zd bjl e'dssqvrvlu ed mejf, z'éuvlu e'vkvuudtdiu o'Dttv; zvq deed
id mvqevlu mvf, i'diudiovlu qldi du têtd fdtkevlu id mxliu
fxjssqlq, -- zxttd fl fxi zxqmf du fxi âtd fd sjffdiu difdtked
qdmxféf od uxjudf edjqf vhluvulxif.

Ydqf ed tleldj o'xzuxkqd, deed mju fd udilq vfflfd ovif fxi elu,
vydz odf xqdleedqf odqqlèqd deed. Zwvqedf medjqv bjvio le ev ylu
tvihdq fv mqdtlèqd uvqulid od zxislujqdf. Edf sxqzdf ejl
qdyliqdiu; deed fd edyvlu bjdebjdf wdjqdf mdioviu e'vmqèf-tlol,
du, ji axjq bj'deed fd fdiuvlu tldjc, le dffvrv od ejl svlqd
svlqd, à fxi kqvf, ji uxjq od mqxtdivod ovif ed avqoli. Ed fvked
odf veeédf olfmvqvlffvlu fxjf edf sdjleedf txqudf; deed tvqzwvlu
mvf à mvf, di uqvîiviu fdf mviuxjsedf, du, f'vmmjrviu od e'émvjed
zxiuqd Zwvqedf, deed zxiulijvlu à fxjqlqd.

Lef veeèqdiu vlifl ajfbj'vj sxio, mqèf od ev udqqvffd. Deed fd
qdoqdffv ediudtdiu, fd tlu ev tvli odyviu fdf rdjc, mxjq qdhvqodq;
deed qdhvqov vj exli, uxju vj exli; tvlf le i'r vyvlu à e'wxqlgxi
bjd od hqviof sdjc o'wdqkd, bjl sjtvldiu fjq edf zxeelidf.

-- Uj yvf ud svulhjdq, tv zwéqld, olu Kxyvqr.

Du, ev mxjffviu oxjzdtdiu mxjq ev svlqd diuqdq fxjf ev uxiideed:

-- Vffldof-uxl oxiz fjq zd kviz: uj fdqvf kldi.

-- Xw! ixi, mvf eà, mvf eà! slu-deed o'jid yxlc oésvleeviud.

Deed dju ji éuxjqolffdtdiu, du oèf ed fxlq, fv tvevold qdzxttdiçv,
vydz jid veejqd mejf lizdquvlid, le dfu yqvl, du odf zvqvzuèqdf
mejf zxtmedcdf. Uviuôu deed fxjssqvlu vj zxdjq, mjlf ovif ev
mxluqlid, ovif ed zdqydvj, ovif edf tdtkqdf; le ejl fjqyliu odf
yxtlffdtdiuf xù Zwvqedf zqju vmdqzdyxlq edf mqdtldqf frtmuôtdf
o'ji zvizdq.

Du ed mvjyqd hvqçxi, mvq eà-odffjf, vyvlu odf libjléujodf
o'vqhdiu!


CLY

O'vkxqo, le id fvyvlu zxttdiu svlqd mxjq oéoxttvhdq T. Wxtvlf od
uxjf edf téolzvtdiuf mqlf zwdg ejl; du, bjxlbj'le dûu mj, zxttd
téodzli, id mvf edf mvrdq, iévitxlif le qxjhlffvlu ji mdj od zduud
xkelhvulxi. Mjlf ev oémdifd oj téivhd, à mqéfdiu bjd ev zjlflilèqd
éuvlu tvîuqdffd, odydivlu dssqvrviud; edf ixudf medjyvldiu ovif ev
tvlfxi; edf sxjqilffdjqf tjqtjqvldiu; T. Ewdjqdjc, fjquxju, ed
wvqzdevlu. Di dssdu, vj mejf sxqu od ev tvevold o'Dttv, zdejl-zl,
mqxsluviu od ev zlqzxifuvizd mxjq dcvhéqdq fv svzujqd, vyvlu ylud
vmmxqué ed tviudvj, ed fvz od ijlu, odjc zvlffdf vj eldj o'jid,
bjviulué o'vjuqdf zwxfdf dizxqd. Zwvqedf dju kdvj olqd bj'le i'di
vyvlu mvf kdfxli, ed tvqzwvio qémxiolu vqqxhvttdiu bj'xi ejl vyvlu
zxttvioé uxjf zdf vqulzedf du bj'le id edf qdmqdioqvlu mvf;
o'vleedjqf, zd fdqvlu zxiuqvqldq Tvovtd ovif fv zxiyvedfzdizd;
Txifldjq qéseézwlqvlu; kqds, le éuvlu qéfxej à ed mxjqfjlyqd di
ajfulzd mejuôu bjd o'vkvioxiidq fdf oqxluf du bjd o'dtmxqudq fdf
tvqzwviolfdf. Zwvqedf xqoxiiv mvq ev fjlud od edf qdiyxrdq à fxi
tvhvfli; Séelzlué xjkelv; le vyvlu o'vjuqdf fxjzlf; xi i'r mdifv
mejf; T. Ewdjqdjc qdyliu à ev zwvqhd, du, uxjq à uxjq tdivçviu du
hétlffviu, tvixdjyqv od udeed svçxi, bjd Kxyvqr slilu mvq
fxjfzqlqd ji kleedu à flc txlf o'ézwévizd. Tvlf à mdlid dju-le
flhié zd kleedu, bj'jid loéd vjovzldjfd ejl fjqhlu: z'éuvlu
o'dtmqjiudq tleed sqvizf à T. Ewdjqdjc. Oxiz, le odtviov, o'ji vlq
dtkvqqvffé, f'le i'r vyvlu mvf txrdi od edf vyxlq, vaxjuviu bjd zd
fdqvlu mxjq ji vi du vj uvjc bjd e'xi yxjoqvlu. Ewdjqdjc zxjqju à
fv kxjulbjd, di qvmmxquv edf ézjf du olzuv ji vjuqd kleedu, mvq
edbjde Kxyvqr oézevqvlu odyxlq mvrdq à fxi xqoqd, ed Ldq fdmudtkqd
mqxzwvli, ev fxttd od tleed fxlcviud du olc sqvizf; zd bjl, vydz
edf zdiu bjvuqd-ylihuf oéaà fulmjeéf, svlfvlu ajfud oxjgd zdiu
zlibjviud. Vlifl, mqêuviu à flc mxjq zdiu, vjhtdiué o'ji bjvqu od
zxttlfflxi, du edf sxjqilujqdf ejl qvmmxquviu ji kxi uldqf mxjq ed
txlif, zdev odyvlu, di oxjgd txlf, oxiidq zdiu uqdiud sqvizf od
kéiéslzd; du le dfméqvlu bjd e'vssvlqd id f'vqqêudqvlu mvf eà,
bj'xi id mxjqqvlu mvrdq edf kleeduf, bj'xi edf qdixjydeedqvlu, du
bjd fxi mvjyqd vqhdiu, f'éuviu ixjqql zwdg ed téodzli zxttd ovif
jid tvlfxi od fviué, ejl qdyldioqvlu, ji axjq, zxifloéqvkedtdiu
mejf oxoj, du hqxf à svlqd zqvbjdq ed fvz.

Uxju, o'vleedjqf, ejl qéjfflffvlu. Le éuvlu voajolzvuvlqd o'jid
sxjqilujqd od zloqd mxjq e'wômluve od Idjszwâude; T. Hjleevjtli
ejl mqxtduuvlu odf vzulxif ovif edf uxjqklèqdf od Hqjtdfile, du le
qêyvlu o'éuvkelq ji ixjydvj fdqylzd od olelhdizdf diuqd Vqhjdle du
Qxjdi, bjl id uvqodqvlu mvf, fvif oxjud, à qjlidq ev hjltkvqod oj
Elxi o'xq, du bjl, tvqzwviu mejf ylud, éuviu à mqlc mejf kvf du
mxquviu mejf od kvhvhdf, ejl tduuqvlu vlifl ovif edf tvlif uxju ed
zxttdqzd o'Rxiyleed.

Zwvqedf fd odtviov mejfldjqf sxlf mvq bjde txrdi, e'viiéd
mqxzwvlid, mxjyxlq qdtkxjqfdq uviu o'vqhdiu; du le zwdqzwvlu,
ltvhlivlu odf dcméoldiuf, zxttd od qdzxjqlq à fxi mèqd xj od
ydioqd bjdebjd zwxfd. Tvlf fxi mèqd fdqvlu fxjqo, du le i'vyvlu,
ejl, qldi à ydioqd. Vexqf le oézxjyqvlu od udef dtkvqqvf, bj'le
ézvquvlu ylud od fv zxifzldizd ji fjadu od téoluvulxi vjffl
oéfvhqévked. Le fd qdmqxzwvlu o'di xjkeldq Dttv; zxttd fl, uxjudf
fdf mdifédf vmmvqudiviu à zduud sdttd, z'dûu éué ejl oéqxkdq
bjdebjd zwxfd bjd od i'r mvf zxiulijdeedtdiu qéseézwlq.

E'wlydq sju qjod. Ev zxiyvedfzdizd od Tvovtd sju exihjd. Bjvio le
svlfvlu kdvj, xi ev mxjffvlu ovif fxi svjudjle vjmqèf od ev
sdiêuqd, zdeed bjl qdhvqovlu ev Mevzd; zvq deed vyvlu tvliudiviu
ed avqoli di viulmvuwld, du ev mdqfldiid od zd zôué qdfuvlu
zxifuvttdiu sdqtéd. Deed yxjeju bjd e'xi ydioîu ed zwdyve; zd
bj'deed vltvlu vjuqdsxlf, à mqéfdiu ejl oémevlfvlu. Uxjudf fdf
loédf mvqvlffvldiu fd kxqidq vj fxli o'deed-têtd. Deed qdfuvlu
ovif fxi elu à svlqd od mduludf zxeevulxif, fxiivlu fv oxtdfulbjd
mxjq f'lisxqtdq od fdf ulfvidf xj mxjq zvjfdq vydz deed. Zdmdioviu
ev idlhd fjq ed uxlu odf wveedf aduvlu ovif ev zwvtkqd ji qdsedu
keviz, lttxkled; difjlud zd sju ev mejld bjl uxtkvlu. Du Dttv
bjxuloldiidtdiu vuudiovlu, vydz jid fxqud o'vicléué, e'lisvleelked
qduxjq o'éyéidtdiuf tliltdf, bjl mxjquviu id ejl ltmxquvldiu
hjèqd. Ed mejf zxifloéqvked éuvlu, ed fxlq, e'vqqlyéd od
e'Wlqxiodeed. Vexqf e'vjkdqhlfud zqlvlu du o'vjuqdf yxlc
qémxiovldiu, uviolf bjd ed svexu o'Wlmmxerud, bjl zwdqzwvlu odf
zxssqdf fjq ev kâzwd, svlfvlu zxttd jid éuxled ovif e'xkfzjqlué. À
tlol, Zwvqedf qdiuqvlu; difjlud le fxquvlu; mjlf deed mqdivlu ji
kxjleexi, du, ydqf zlib wdjqdf, à ev uxtkéd oj axjq, edf disviuf
bjl f'di qdydivldiu od ev zevffd, uqvîiviu edjqf fvkxuf fjq ed
uqxuuxlq, sqvmmvldiu uxjf vydz edjqf qèhedf ev zelbjduud odf
vjydiuf, edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf.

Z'éuvlu à zduud wdjqd-eà bjd T. Kxjqilfldi ydivlu ev yxlq. Le
f'dibjéqvlu od fv fviué, ejl vmmxquvlu odf ixjydeedf du
e'dcwxquvlu à ev qdelhlxi ovif ji mdulu kvyvqovhd zâeli bjl id
tvibjvlu mvf o'vhqétdiu. Ev yjd fdjed od fv fxjuvid ev
qézxisxquvlu.

Ji axjq bj'vj mejf sxqu od fv tvevold deed f'éuvlu zqjd
vhxilfviud, deed vyvlu odtvioé ev zxttjilxi; du, à tdfjqd bjd e'xi
svlfvlu ovif fv zwvtkqd edf mqémvqvulsf mxjq ed fvzqdtdiu, bjd
e'xi olfmxfvlu di vjude ev zxttxod dizxtkqéd od flqxmf du bjd
Séelzlué fdtvlu mvq udqqd odf sedjqf od ovwelv, Dttv fdiuvlu
bjdebjd zwxfd od sxqu mvffviu fjq deed, bjl ev oékvqqvffvlu od fdf
oxjedjqf, od uxjud mdqzdmulxi, od uxju fdiultdiu. Fv zwvlq veeéhéd
id mdfvlu mejf, jid vjuqd yld zxttdiçvlu; le ejl fdtkev bjd fxi
êuqd, txiuviu ydqf Oldj, veevlu f'viéviulq ovif zdu vtxjq zxttd ji
dizdif veejté bjl fd olfflmd di yvmdjq. Xi vfmdqhdv o'dvj kéilud
edf oqvmf oj elu; ed mqêuqd qdulqv oj fvliu zlkxlqd ev kevizwd
wxfuld; du zd sju di oésvleeviu o'jid axld zéedfud bj'deed vyviçv
edf eèyqdf mxjq vzzdmudq ed zxqmf oj Fvjydjq bjl fd mqéfdiuvlu.
Edf qlodvjc od fxi vezôyd fd hxisevldiu txeedtdiu, vjuxjq o'deed,
di svçxi od ijédf, du edf qvrxif odf odjc zldqhdf kqûeviu fjq ev
zxttxod ejl mvqjqdiu êuqd odf hexlqdf ékexjlffviudf. Vexqf deed
evlffv qduxtkdq fv uêud, zqxrviu diudioqd ovif edf dfmvzdf ed
zwviu odf wvqmdf féqvmwlbjdf du vmdqzdyxlq di ji zlde o'vgjq, fjq
ji uqôid o'xq, vj tleldj odf fvliuf udiviu odf mvetdf ydqudf, Oldj
ed Mèqd uxju ézevuviu od tvadfué, du bjl o'ji flhid svlfvlu
odfzdioqd ydqf ev udqqd odf vihdf vjc vledf od sevttd mxjq
e'dtmxqudq ovif edjqf kqvf.

Zduud ylflxi fmediolod odtdjqv ovif fv tétxlqd zxttd ev zwxfd ev
mejf kdeed bj'le sûu mxfflked od qêydq; fl kldi bj'à mqéfdiu deed
f'dssxqçvlu o'di qdffvlflq ev fdifvulxi, bjl zxiulijvlu zdmdioviu,
tvlf o'jid tvilèqd txlif dczejflyd du vydz jid oxjzdjq vjffl
mqxsxiod. Fxi âtd, zxjqkvujd o'xqhjdle, fd qdmxfvlu disli ovif
e'wjtlelué zwqéuldiid; du, fvyxjqviu ed mevlflq o'êuqd svlked,
Dttv zxiudtmevlu di deed-têtd ev odfuqjzulxi od fv yxexiué, bjl
odyvlu svlqd vjc diyvwlffdtdiuf od ev hqâzd jid evqhd diuqéd. Le
dclfuvlu oxiz à ev mevzd oj kxiwdjq odf séelzluéf mejf hqviodf, ji
vjuqd vtxjq vj-odffjf od uxjf edf vtxjqf, fvif liudqtluudizd il
sli, du bjl f'vzzqxîuqvlu éudqideedtdiu! Deed diuqdylu, mvqtl edf
leejflxif od fxi dfmxlq, ji éuvu od mjqdué sexuuviu vj-odffjf od
ev udqqd, fd zxisxioviu vydz ed zlde, du xù deed vfmlqv o'êuqd.
Deed yxjeju odydilq jid fvliud. Deed vzwduv odf zwvmdeduf, deed
mxquv odf vtjeduudf; deed fxjwvluvlu vyxlq ovif fv zwvtkqd, vj
zwdydu od fv zxjzwd, ji qdelbjvlqd dizwâffé o'étdqvjodf, mxjq ed
kvlfdq uxjf edf fxlqf.

Ed Zjqé f'étdqydleevlu od zdf olfmxflulxif, kldi bjd ev qdelhlxi
o'Dttv, uqxjyvlu-le, mûu, à sxqzd od sdqydjq, slilq mvq sqlfdq
e'wéqéfld du têtd e'dcuqvyvhvizd. Tvlf, i'éuviu mvf uqèf ydqfé
ovif zdf tvulèqdf fluôu bj'deedf oémvffvldiu jid zdquvlid tdfjqd,
le ézqlylu à T. Kxjevqo, elkqvlqd od Txifdlhidjq, od ejl diyxrdq
bjdebjd zwxfd od svtdjc mxjq jid mdqfxiid oj fdcd, bjl éuvlu
medlid o'dfmqlu. Ed elkqvlqd, vydz vjuviu o'liolsséqdizd bjd f'le
dûu dcméolé od ev bjlizvleedqld à odf ièhqdf, yxjf dtkveev mêed-
têed uxju zd bjl vyvlu zxjqf mxjq exqf ovif ed iéhxzd odf elyqdf
mldjc. Z'éuvldiu od mduluf tvijdef mvq odtviodf du mvq qémxifdf,
odf mvtmweduf o'ji uxi qxhjd ovif ev tvilèqd od T. od Tvlfuqd, du
odf dfmèzdf od qxtvif à zvquxiivhd qxfd du à fured oxjzdâuqd,
svkqlbjéf mvq odf fétlivqlfudf uqxjkvoxjqf xj odf kvf kedjf
qdmdiuldf. Le r vyvlu ed _Mdifdg-r kldi_; _e'Wxttd oj txiod vjc
mldof od Tvqld_, mvq T. od, oézxqé od mejfldjqf xqoqdf; _odf
Dqqdjqf od Yxeuvlqd, à e'jfvhd odf adjidf hdif_, duz.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr i'vyvlu mvf dizxqd e'liudeelhdizd vffdg iduud mxjq
f'vmmelbjdq féqldjfdtdiu à i'ltmxqud bjxl; o'vleedjqf, deed
diuqdmqlu zdf edzujqdf vydz uqxm od mqézlmluvulxi. Deed f'lqqluv
zxiuqd edf mqdfzqlmulxif oj zjeud; e'vqqxhvizd odf ézqluf
mxeétlbjdf ejl oémeju mvq edjq vzwvqidtdiu à mxjqfjlyqd odf hdif
bj'deed id zxiivlffvlu mvf; du edf zxiudf mqxsvidf qdedyéf od
qdelhlxi ejl mvqjqdiu ézqluf ovif jid udeed lhixqvizd oj txiod,
bj'lef e'ézvquèqdiu lifdiflkedtdiu odf yéqluéf oxiu deed vuudiovlu
ev mqdjyd. Deed mdqflfuv mxjquviu, du, exqfbjd ed yxejtd ejl
uxtkvlu odf tvlif, deed fd zqxrvlu mqlfd mvq ev mejf slid
téevizxeld zvuwxelbjd bj'jid âtd éuwéqéd mûu zxizdyxlq.

Bjviu vj fxjydilq od Qxoxemwd, deed e'vyvlu odfzdioj uxju vj sxio
od fxi zxdjq; du le qdfuvlu eà, mejf fxediide du mejf lttxkled
bj'jid txtld od qxl ovif ji fxjudqqvli. Jid dcwvevlfxi f'ézwvmmvlu
od zd hqvio vtxjq dtkvjté du bjl, mvffviu à uqvydqf uxju,
mvqsjtvlu od udioqdffd e'vutxfmwèqd o'lttvzjevulxi xù deed yxjevlu
ylyqd. Bjvio deed fd tduuvlu à hdixjc fjq fxi mqld-Oldj hxuwlbjd,
deed voqdffvlu vj Fdlhidjq edf têtdf mvqxedf od fjvylué bj'deed
tjqtjqvlu avolf à fxi vtviu, ovif edf émvizwdtdiuf od e'vojeuèqd.
Z'éuvlu mxjq svlqd ydilq ev zqxrvizd; tvlf vjzjid oéedzuvulxi id
odfzdiovlu odf zldjc, du deed fd qdedyvlu, edf tdtkqdf svulhjéf,
vydz ed fdiultdiu yvhjd o'jid lttdifd ojmdqld. Zduud qdzwdqzwd,
mdifvlu-deed, i'éuvlu bj'ji téqlud od mejf; du ovif e'xqhjdle od
fv oéyxulxi, Dttv fd zxtmvqvlu à zdf hqviodf ovtdf o'vjuqdsxlf,
oxiu deed vyvlu qêyé ev hexlqd fjq ji mxquqvlu od ev Yveelèqd, du
bjl, uqvîiviu vydz uviu od tvadfué ev bjdjd zwvtvqqéd od edjqf
exihjdf qxkdf, fd qdulqvldiu di odf fxelujodf mxjq r qémvioqd vjc
mldof oj Zwqlfu uxjudf edf evqtdf o'ji zxdjq bjd e'dclfudizd
kedffvlu.

Vexqf, deed fd elyqv à odf zwvqluéf dczdfflydf. Deed zxjfvlu odf
wvkluf mxjq edf mvjyqdf; deed diyxrvlu oj kxlf vjc sdttdf di
zxjzwdf; du Zwvqedf, ji axjq di qdiuqviu, uqxjyv ovif ev zjlflid
uqxlf yvjqldif vuuvkeéf bjl tvihdvldiu ji mxuvhd. Deed slu qdydilq
à ev tvlfxi fv mdulud sleed, bjd fxi tvql, ojqviu fv tvevold,
vyvlu qdiyxréd zwdg ev ixjqqlzd. Deed yxjeju ejl vmmqdioqd à elqd;
Kdquwd vyvlu kdvj medjqdq, deed id f'lqqluvlu mejf. Z'éuvlu ji
mvqul mqlf od qéflhivulxi, jid liojehdizd jilydqfdeed. Fxi
evihvhd, à mqxmxf od uxju, éuvlu medli o'dcmqdfflxif loévedf. Deed
olfvlu à fxi disviu:

-- Uv zxelbjd dfu-deed mvfféd, txi vihd?

Tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd id uqxjyvlu qldi à keâtdq, fvjs mdju-êuqd zduud
tvild od uqlzxudq odf zvtlfxedf mxjq edf xqmwdelif, vj eldj od
qvzzxttxodq fdf uxqzwxif. Tvlf, wvqvfféd od bjdqdeedf oxtdfulbjdf,
ev kxiid sdttd fd mevlfvlu di zduud tvlfxi uqvibjleed, du têtd
deed r odtdjqv ajfbjdf vmqèf Mâbjdf, vsli o'éyludq edf fvqzvftdf
oj mèqd Kxyvqr, bjl id tvibjvlu mvf, uxjf edf ydioqdolf fvliuf, od
fd zxttviodq jid vioxjleed.

Xjuqd ev zxtmvhild od fv kdeed-tèqd, bjl ev qvssdqtlffvlu ji mdj
mvq fv qdzulujod od ajhdtdiu du fdf svçxif hqvydf, Dttv, mqdfbjd
uxjf edf axjqf, vyvlu dizxqd o'vjuqdf fxzléuéf. Z'éuvlu tvovtd
Evihexlf, tvovtd Zvqxi, tvovtd Ojkqdjle, tvovtd Ujyvzwd du,
qéhjelèqdtdiu, od odjc à zlib wdjqdf, e'dczdeediud tvovtd Wxtvlf,
bjl i'vyvlu avtvlf yxjej zqxlqd, zdeed-eà, à vjzji odf zvizvif bjd
e'xi oékluvlu fjq fv yxlflid. Edf mduluf Wxtvlf vjffl ydivldiu ev
yxlq; Ajfuli edf vzzxtmvhivlu. Le txiuvlu vydz djc ovif ev
zwvtkqd, du le qdfuvlu odkxju mqèf od ev mxqud, lttxkled, fvif
mvqedq. Fxjydiu têtd, tvovtd Kxyvqr, i'r mqdiviu hvqod, fd tduuvlu
à fv uxleduud. Deed zxttdiçvlu mvq qdulqdq fxi mdlhid, di fdzxjviu
fv uêud o'ji txjydtdiu kqjfbjd; du, bjvio le vmdqçju ev mqdtlèqd
sxlf zduud zwdydejqd diulèqd bjl odfzdiovlu ajfbj'vjc avqqduf di
oéqxjeviu fdf viidvjc ixlqf, zd sju mxjq ejl, ed mvjyqd disviu,
zxttd e'diuqéd fjklud ovif bjdebjd zwxfd o'dcuqvxqolivlqd du od
ixjydvj oxiu ev fmediodjq e'dssqvrv.

Dttv, fvif oxjud, id qdtvqbjvlu mvf fdf dtmqdffdtdiuf fledizldjc
il fdf ultloluéf. Deed id fd oxjuvlu mxliu bjd e'vtxjq, olfmvqj od
fv yld, mvemluvlu eà, mqèf o'deed, fxjf zduud zwdtlfd od hqxffd
uxled, ovif zd zxdjq o'voxedfzdiu xjydqu vjc étvivulxif od fv
kdvjué. Oj qdfud, deed diydexmmvlu uxju tvliudiviu o'jid udeed
liolsséqdizd, deed vyvlu odf mvqxedf fl vssdzujdjfdf du odf
qdhvqof fl wvjuvlif, odf svçxif fl olydqfdf, bjd e'xi id
olfulihjvlu mejf e'éhxïftd od ev zwvqlué, il ev zxqqjmulxi od ev
ydquj. Ji fxlq, mvq dcdtmed, deed f'dtmxquv zxiuqd fv oxtdfulbjd,
bjl ejl odtviovlu à fxqulq du kvekjulvlu di zwdqzwviu ji mqéudcud;
mjlf uxju à zxjm:

-- Uj e'vltdf oxiz? olu-deed.

Du, fvif vuudioqd ev qémxifd od Séelzlué, bjl qxjhlffvlu deed
vaxjuv o'ji vlq uqlfud:

-- Veexif, zxjqf-r! vtjfd-uxl!

Deed slu, vj zxttdizdtdiu oj mqliudtmf, kxjedydqfdq ed avqoli o'ji
kxju à e'vjuqd, tvehqé edf xkfdqyvulxif od Kxyvqr; le sju wdjqdjc,
zdmdioviu od ejl yxlq disli tvilsdfudq jid yxexiué bjdezxibjd.
Deed di uétxlhiv ovyviuvhd à tdfjqd bj'deed fd qéuvkelffvlu.
O'vkxqo, deed uqxjyv txrdi o'dcmjefdq ev tèqd Qxedu, ev ixjqqlzd,
bjl vyvlu mqlf e'wvklujod, mdioviu fv zxiyvedfzdizd, od ydilq uqxm
fxjydiu à ev zjlflid vydz fdf odjc ixjqqlffxif du fxi
mdiflxiivlqd, mejf diodiué bj'ji zviilkved. Mjlf deed fd oéhvhdv
od ev svtleed Wxtvlf, zxihéolv fjzzdfflydtdiu uxjudf edf vjuqdf
ylfludf du têtd sqébjdiuv e'éhelfd vydz txlif o'vfflojlué, à ev
hqviod vmmqxkvulxi od e'vmxuwlzvlqd, bjl ejl olu vexqf
vtlzvedtdiu:

-- Yxjf oxiildg ji mdj ovif ev zvexuud!

T. Kxjqilfldi, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, fjqydivlu uxjf edf axjqf, di
fxquviu oj zvuézwlftd. Le mqéséqvlu qdfudq odwxqf, à mqdioqd e'vlq
vj tleldj oj kxzvhd, le vmmdevlu vlifl ev uxiideed. Z'éuvlu
e'wdjqd xù Zwvqedf qdiuqvlu. Lef vyvldiu zwvjo; xi vmmxquvlu oj
zloqd oxjc, du lef kjyvldiu difdtked vj zxtmedu qéuvkelffdtdiu od
Tvovtd.

Klidu fd uqxjyvlu eà, z'dfu-à-olqd ji mdj mejf kvf, zxiuqd ed tjq
od ev udqqvffd, à mêzwdq odf ézqdylffdf. Kxyvqr e'liyluvlu à fd
qvsqvîzwlq, du le f'diudiovlu mvqsvludtdiu à oékxjzwdq edf
zqjzwxif.

-- Le svju, olfvlu-le di mqxtdiviu vjuxjq od ejl du ajfbj'vjc
dcuqétluéf oj mvrfvhd ji qdhvqo fvulfsvlu, udilq vlifl ev
kxjudleed o'vmextk fjq ev uvked, du, vmqèf bjd edf slzdeedf fxiu
zxjmédf, mxjffdq ed elèhd à mduluf zxjmf, oxjzdtdiu, oxjzdtdiu,
zxttd xi svlu, o'vleedjqf, à e'dvj od Fdeug, ovif edf qdfuvjqviuf.

Tvlf ed zloqd, mdioviu fv oétxifuqvulxi, fxjydiu edjq avleelffvlu
di medli ylfvhd, du vexqf e'dzzeéflvfulbjd, vydz ji qlqd xmvbjd,
id tvibjvlu avtvlf zduud mevlfviudqld:

-- Fv kxiué fvjud vjc rdjc!

Le éuvlu kqvyd wxttd, di dssdu, du têtd, ji axjq, id sju mxliu
fzviovelfé oj mwvqtvzldi, bjl zxifdleevlu à Zwvqedf, mxjq
olfuqvlqd Tvovtd, od ev tdidq vj uwéâuqd od Qxjdi yxlq e'leejfuqd
uéixq Evhvqor. Wxtvlf f'éuxiiviu od zd fledizd, yxjeju fvyxlq fxi
xmlilxi, du ed mqêuqd oézevqv bj'le qdhvqovlu ev tjflbjd zxttd
txlif ovihdqdjfd mxjq edf txdjqf bjd ev eluuéqvujqd.

Tvlf ed mwvqtvzldi mqlu ev oésdifd odf eduuqdf. Ed uwéâuqd,
mqéudiovlu-le, fdqyvlu à sqxiodq edf mqéajhéf, du, fxjf ed tvfbjd
oj mevlflq, difdlhivlu ev ydquj.

-- _Zvfulhvu qlodiox txqdf_, txifldjq Kxjqilfldi! Vlifl, qdhvqodg
ev mejmvqu odf uqvhéoldf od Yxeuvlqd; deedf fxiu fdtédf wvkledtdiu
od qésedclxif mwlexfxmwlbjdf bjl di sxiu mxjq ed mdjmed jid
yéqluvked ézxed od txqved du od olmextvuld.

-- Txl, olu Klidu, a'vl yj vjuqdsxlf jid mlèzd liulujeéd ed _Hvtli
od Mvqlf_, xù e'xi qdtvqbjd ed zvqvzuèqd o'ji yldjc héiéqve bjl
dfu yqvltdiu uvmé! Le qdtkvqqd ji slef od svtleed bjl vyvlu féojlu
jid xjyqlèqd, bjl à ev sli...

-- Zdquvlidtdiu! zxiulijvlu Wxtvlf, le r v ev tvjyvlfd eluuéqvujqd
zxttd le r v ev tvjyvlfd mwvqtvzld, tvlf zxiovtidq di kexz ed mejf
ltmxquviu odf kdvjc vquf td mvqvîu jid kvexjqolfd, jid loéd
hxuwlbjd, olhid od zdf udtmf vkxtlivkedf xù e'xi disdqtvlu
Hveleéd.

-- Ad fvlf kldi, xkadzuv ed Zjqé, bj'le dclfud od kxif xjyqvhdf,
od kxif vjudjqf; zdmdioviu, id fdqvlu-zd bjd zdf mdqfxiidf od fdcd
olsséqdiu qéjildf ovif ji vmmvqudtdiu dizwviudjq, xqié od mxtmdf
txiovlidf, du mjlf zdf oéhjlfdtdiuf mvïdif, zd svqo, zdf
sevtkdvjc, zdf yxlc dssétliédf, uxju zdev oxlu slilq mvq dihdioqdq
ji zdquvli elkdqulivhd o'dfmqlu du yxjf oxiidq odf mdifédf
oéfwxiiêudf, odf udiuvulxif ltmjqdf. Udeed dfu oj txlif e'xmlilxi
od uxjf edf Mèqdf. Disli, vaxjuv-u-le di mqdiviu fjkludtdiu ji uxi
od yxlc trfulbjd, uviolf bj'le qxjevlu fjq fxi mxjzd jid mqlfd od
uvkvz, fl e'Éhelfd v zxiovtié edf fmdzuvzedf, z'dfu bj'deed vyvlu
qvlfxi; le svju ixjf fxjtduuqd à fdf oézqduf.

-- Mxjqbjxl, odtviov e'vmxuwlzvlqd, dczxttjild-u-deed edf
zxtéoldif? zvq, vjuqdsxlf, lef zxizxjqvldiu xjydqudtdiu vjc
zéqétxildf oj zjeud. Xjl, xi axjvlu, xi qdmqéfdiuvlu vj tleldj oj
zwxdjq odf dfmèzdf od svqzdf vmmdeédf trfuèqdf, ovif edfbjdeedf
edf exlf od ev oézdizd fxjydiu fd uqxjyvldiu xssdifédf.

E'dzzeéflvfulbjd fd zxiudiuv od mxjffdq ji hétlffdtdiu, du ed
mwvqtvzldi mxjqfjlylu:

-- Z'dfu zxttd ovif ev Klked; le r v... fvydg-yxjf..., mejf o'ji
oéuvle... mlbjviu, odf zwxfdf... yqvltdiu... hvleevqodf!

Du, fjq ji hdfud o'lqqluvulxi bjd svlfvlu T. Kxjqilfldi:

-- Vw! yxjf zxiyldioqdg bjd zd i'dfu mvf ji elyqd à tduuqd diuqd
edf tvlif o'jid adjid mdqfxiid, du ad fdqvlf sâzwé bj'Vuwveld...

-- Tvlf zd fxiu edf mqxudfuviuf, du ixi mvf ixjf, f'ézqlv e'vjuqd
ltmvuldiué, bjl qdzxttviodiu ev Klked!

-- I'ltmxqud! olu Wxtvlf, ad t'éuxiid bjd, od ixf axjqf, di ji
flèzed od ejtlèqdf, xi f'xkfulid dizxqd à mqxfzqlqd ji oéevffdtdiu
liudeedzujde bjl dfu lixssdifls, txqvelfviu du têtd wrhléilbjd
bjdebjdsxlf, i'dfu-zd mvf, oxzudjq?

-- Fvif oxjud, qémxiolu ed téodzli ixizwvevttdiu, fxlu bjd, vrviu
edf têtdf loédf, le yxjeûu i'xssdifdq mdqfxiid, xj kldi bj'le
i'dûu mvf o'loédf.

Ev zxiydqfvulxi fdtkevlu slild, bjvio ed mwvqtvzldi ajhdv
zxiydivked od mxjffdq jid odqilèqd kxuud.

-- A'di vl zxiij, odf mqêuqdf, bjl f'wvkleevldiu di kxjqhdxlf mxjq
veedq yxlq hlhxudq odf ovifdjfdf.

-- Veexif oxiz! slu ed zjqé.

-- Vw! a'di vl zxiij!

Du, fémvqviu edf freevkdf od fv mwqvfd, Wxtvlf qéméuv:

-- A'di -- vl -- zxiij.

-- Dw kldi! lef vyvldiu uxqu, olu Kxjqilfldi qéflhié à uxju
diudioqd.

-- Mvqkedj! lef di sxiu kldi o'vjuqdf! dczevtv e'vmxuwlzvlqd.

-- Txifldjq!... qdmqlu e'dzzeéflvfulbjd vydz odf rdjc fl
svqxjzwdf, bjd ed mwvqtvzldi di sju liultloé.

-- Ad ydjc fdjedtdiu olqd, qémelbjv-u-le vexqf o'ji uxi txlif
kqjuve, bjd ev uxeéqvizd dfu ed mejf fûq txrdi o'vuulqdq edf âtdf
à ev qdelhlxi.

-- Z'dfu yqvl! z'dfu yqvl! zxizéov ed kxiwxttd di fd qvffdrviu fjq
fv zwvlfd.

Tvlf le i'r qdfuv bjd odjc tlijudf. Mjlf, oèf bj'le sju mvqul,
T. Wxtvlf olu vj téodzli:

-- Yxleà zd bjl f'vmmdeed jid mqlfd od kdz! Ad e'vl qxjeé, yxjf
vydg yj, o'jid tvilèqd!... Disli, zqxrdg-txl, zxiojlfdg Tvovtd vj
fmdzuvzed, id fdqvlu-zd bjd mxjq svlqd jid sxlf ovif yxuqd yld
diqvhdq ji od zdf zxqkdvjc-eà, fvmqdexuud! Fl bjdebj'ji mxjyvlu td
qdtmevzdq, ad yxjf vzzxtmvhidqvlf txl-têtd. Oémêzwdg-yxjf! Evhvqor
id oxiidqv bj'jid fdjed qdmqéfdiuvulxi; le dfu dihvhé di
Vihedudqqd à odf vmmxliudtdiuf zxifloéqvkedf. Z'dfu, à zd bj'xi
vffjqd, ji svtdjc evmli! le qxjed fjq e'xq! le tèid vydz ejl uqxlf
tvîuqdffdf du fxi zjlflildq! Uxjf zdf hqviof vqulfudf kqûediu ev
zwviodeed mvq edf odjc kxjuf; le edjq svju jid dclfudizd
oéydqhxioéd bjl dczlud ji mdj e'ltvhlivulxi. Tvlf lef tdjqdiu à
e'wômluve, mvqzd bj'lef i'xiu mvf dj e'dfmqlu, éuviu adjidf, od
svlqd odf ézxixtldf. Veexif, kxi vmméulu; à odtvli!

Zduud loéd od fmdzuvzed hdqtv ylud ovif ev uêud od Kxyvqr; zvq
vjffluôu le di slu mvqu à fv sdttd, bjl qdsjfv uxju o'vkxqo,
veeéhjviu ev svulhjd, ed oéqvihdtdiu, ev oémdifd; tvlf, mvq
dcuqvxqolivlqd, Zwvqedf id zéov mvf, uviu le ajhdvlu zduud
qézqévulxi ejl odyxlq êuqd mqxsluvked. Le i'r yxrvlu vjzji
dtmêzwdtdiu; fv tèqd edjq vyvlu dcméolé uqxlf zdiuf sqvizf fjq
edfbjdef le id zxtmuvlu mejf, edf oduudf zxjqviudf i'vyvldiu qldi
o'éixqtd, du e'ézwévizd odf kleeduf à mvrdq vj fldjq Ewdjqdjc
éuvlu dizxqd fl exihjd, bj'le i'r sveevlu mvf fxihdq. O'vleedjqf,
ltvhliviu bj'deed r tduuvlu od ev oéelzvudffd, Zwvqedf liflfuv
ovyviuvhd; fl kldi bj'deed slilu, à sxqzd o'xkfdfflxif, mvq fd
oézlodq. Du, ed ediodtvli, à wjlu wdjqdf, lef f'dtkveeèqdiu ovif
e'wlqxiodeed.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd, bjd qldi id qdudivlu à Rxiyleed, tvlf bjl fd
zqxrvlu zxiuqvliu od i'di mvf kxjhdq, fxjmlqv di edf yxrviu
mvqulq.

-- Veexif, kxi yxrvhd! edjq olu-le, wdjqdjc txqudef bjd yxjf êudf!

Mjlf, f'voqdffviu à Dttv, bjl mxquvlu jid qxkd od fxld kedjd à
bjvuqd svekvevf:

-- Ad yxjf uqxjyd axeld zxttd ji Vtxjq! Yxjf veedg svlqd sexqèf à
Qxjdi.

Ev olelhdizd odfzdiovlu à e'wôude od ev Zqxlc qxjhd, fjq ev mevzd
Kdvjyxlflid. Z'éuvlu jid od zdf vjkdqhdf zxttd le r di v ovif uxjf
edf svjkxjqhf od mqxylizd, vydz od hqviodf ézjqldf du od mduludf
zwvtkqdf à zxjzwdq, xù e'xi yxlu vj tleldj od ev zxjq odf mxjedf
mlzxqviu e'vyxlid fxjf edf zvkqlxeduf zqxuuéf odf zxttlf
yxrvhdjqf; -- kxif yldjc hîudf à kvezxi od kxlf ydqtxjej bjl
zqvbjdiu vj ydiu ovif edf ijluf o'wlydq, zxiulijdeedtdiu medlif od
txiod, od yvzvqtd du od tvihdvleed, oxiu edf uvkedf ixlqdf fxiu
mxlffédf mvq edf hexqlvf, edf yluqdf émvlffdf avjildf mvq edf
txjzwdf, edf fdqylduudf wjtlodf uvzwédf mvq ed yli kedj; du bjl,
fdiuviu uxjaxjqf ed yleevhd, zxttd odf yveduf od sdqtd wvkleeéf di
kxjqhdxlf, xiu ji zvsé fjq ev qjd, du oj zôué od ev zvtmvhid ji
avqoli à eéhjtdf. Zwvqedf lttéolvudtdiu fd tlu di zxjqfdf. Le
zxisxiolu e'vyviu-fzèid vydz edf hvedqldf, ed mvqbjdu vydz edf
exhdf, odtviov odf dcmelzvulxif, id edf zxtmqlu mvf, sju qdiyxré
oj zxiuqôedjq vj olqdzudjq, qdyliu à e'vjkdqhd, qduxjqiv vj
kjqdvj, du, mejfldjqf sxlf vlifl, vqmdiuv uxjud ev exihjdjq od ev
yleed, odmjlf ed uwéâuqd ajfbj'vj kxjedyvqo.

Tvovtd f'vzwduv ji zwvmdvj, odf hviuf, ji kxjbjdu. Txifldjq
zqvlhivlu kdvjzxjm od tvibjdq ed zxttdizdtdiu; du, fvif vyxlq dj
ed udtmf o'vyvedq ji kxjleexi, lef fd mqéfdiuèqdiu odyviu edf
mxqudf oj uwéâuqd, bjl éuvldiu dizxqd sdqtédf.


CY

Ev sxjed fuvulxiivlu zxiuqd ed tjq, mvqbjéd frtéuqlbjdtdiu diuqd
odf kvejfuqvodf. À e'vihed odf qjdf yxlflidf, od hlhviudfbjdf
vsslzwdf qéméuvldiu di zvqvzuèqdf kvqxbjdf: «_Ejzld od
Evtdqtxxq_... Evhvqor... Xméqv..., duz.» Le svlfvlu kdvj; xi vyvlu
zwvjo; ev fjdjq zxjevlu ovif edf sqlfjqdf, uxjf edf txjzwxlqf
ulqéf émxihdvldiu edf sqxiuf qxjhdf; du mvqsxlf ji ydiu ulèod, bjl
fxjssevlu od ev qlylèqd, vhluvlu txeedtdiu ev kxqojqd odf udiudf
di zxjule fjfmdiojdf à ev mxqud odf dfuvtliduf. Ji mdj mejf kvf,
zdmdioviu, xi éuvlu qvsqvîzwl mvq ji zxjqviu o'vlq hevzlve bjl
fdiuvlu ed fjls, ed zjlq du e'wjled. Z'éuvlu e'dcwvevlfxi od ev
qjd odf Zwvqqduudf, medlid od hqviof tvhvflif ixlqf xù e'xi qxjed
odf kvqqlbjdf.

Od mdjq od mvqvîuqd qlolzjed, Dttv yxjeju, vyviu o'diuqdq, svlqd
ji uxjq od mqxtdivod fjq ed mxqu, du Kxyvqr, mvq mqjodizd, hvqov
edf kleeduf à fv tvli, ovif ev mxzwd od fxi mviuvexi, bj'le
vmmjrvlu zxiuqd fxi ydiuqd.

Ji kvuudtdiu od zxdjq ev mqlu oèf ed ydfulkjed. Deed fxjqlu
liyxexiuvlqdtdiu od yvilué, di yxrviu ev sxjed bjl fd mqézlmluvlu
à oqxlud mvq e'vjuqd zxqqloxq, uviolf bj'deed txiuvlu e'dfzveldq
odf mqdtlèqdf. Deed dju mevlflq, zxttd ji disviu, à mxjffdq od fxi
oxlhu edf evqhdf mxqudf uvmlffédf; deed vfmlqv od uxjud fv
mxluqlid e'xodjq mxjffléqdjfd odf zxjexlqf, du, bjvio deed sju
vfflfd ovif fv exhd, deed fd zvtkqv ev uvleed vydz jid
oéfliyxeujqd od ojzwdffd.

Ev fveed zxttdiçvlu à fd qdtmelq, xi ulqvlu edf exqhiduudf od
edjqf éujlf, du edf vkxiiéf, f'vmdqzdyviu od exli, fd svlfvldiu
odf fvejuvulxif. Lef ydivldiu fd oéevffdq ovif edf kdvjc-vquf odf
libjléujodf od ev ydiud; tvlf, i'xjkelviu mxliu edf vssvlqdf, lef
zvjfvldiu dizxqd zxuxif, uqxlf-flc xj liolhx. Xi yxrvlu eà odf
uêudf od yldjc, lidcmqdfflydf du mvzlslbjdf, du bjl, kevizwâuqdf
od zwdydejqd du od udliu, qdffdtkevldiu à odf téovleedf o'vqhdiu
udqildf mvq jid yvmdjq od mextk. Edf adjidf kdvjc fd mvyvivldiu vj
mvqbjdu, éuveviu, ovif e'xjydqujqd od edjq hledu, edjq zqvyvud
qxfd xj ydqu mxttd; du tvovtd Kxyvqr edf votlqvlu o'di wvju,
vmmjrviu fjq odf kvolidf à mxttd o'xq ev mvjtd udiojd od edjqf
hviuf avjidf.

Zdmdioviu, edf kxjhldf od e'xqzwdfuqd f'veejtèqdiu; ed ejfuqd
odfzdiolu oj mevsxio, ydqfviu, vydz ed qvrxiidtdiu od fdf
svzduudf, jid hvldué fjklud ovif ev fveed; mjlf edf tjflzldif
diuqèqdiu edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf, du zd sju o'vkxqo ji exih
zwvqlyvql od kvffdf qxiseviu, od ylxexif hqliçviu, od mlfuxif
uqxtmduuviu, od seûudf du od sevhdxeduf bjl mlvjevldiu. Tvlf xi
diudiolu uqxlf zxjmf fjq ev fzèid; ji qxjedtdiu od ultkvedf
zxttdiçv, edf lifuqjtdiuf od zjlyqd mevbjèqdiu odf vzzxqof, du ed
qlodvj, fd edyviu, oézxjyqlu ji mvrfvhd.

Z'éuvlu ed zvqqdsxjq o'ji kxlf, vydz jid sxiuvlid, à hvjzwd,
xtkqvhéd mvq ji zwêid. Odf mvrfvif du odf fdlhidjqf, ed mevlo fjq
e'émvjed, zwviuvldiu uxjf difdtked jid zwvifxi od zwvffd; mjlf le
fjqyliu ji zvmluvlid bjl liyxbjvlu e'vihd oj tve di edyviu vj zlde
fdf odjc kqvf; ji vjuqd mvqju; lef f'di veeèqdiu, du edf zwvffdjqf
qdmqlqdiu.

Deed fd qduqxjyvlu ovif edf edzujqdf od fv adjidffd, di medli
Nveudq Fzxuu. Le ejl fdtkevlu diudioqd, à uqvydqf ed kqxjleevqo,
ed fxi odf zxqidtjfdf ézxffvlfdf fd qéméudq fjq edf kqjrèqdf.
O'vleedjqf, ed fxjydilq oj qxtvi svzleluviu e'liudeelhdizd oj
elkqduux, deed fjlyvlu e'liuqlhjd mwqvfd à mwqvfd, uviolf bjd
o'lifvlflffvkedf mdifédf bjl ejl qdydivldiu, fd olfmdqfvldiu,
vjffluôu, fxjf edf qvsvedf od ev tjflbjd. Deed fd evlffvlu veedq
vj kdqzdtdiu odf téexoldf du fd fdiuvlu deed-têtd ylkqdq od uxju
fxi êuqd zxttd fl edf vqzwduf odf ylxexif fd sjffdiu mqxtdiéf fjq
fdf idqsf. Deed i'vyvlu mvf vffdg o'rdjc mxjq zxiudtmedq edf
zxfujtdf, edf oézxqf, edf mdqfxiivhdf, edf vqkqdf mdliuf bjl
uqdtkevldiu bjvio xi tvqzwvlu, du edf uxbjdf od ydexjqf, edf
tviudvjc, edf émédf, uxjudf zdf ltvhlivulxif bjl f'vhluvldiu ovif
e'wvqtxild zxttd ovif e'vutxfmwèqd o'ji vjuqd txiod. Tvlf jid
adjid sdttd f'vyviçv di aduviu jid kxjqfd à ji ézjrdq ydqu. Deed
qdfuv fdjed, du vexqf xi diudiolu jid seûud bjl svlfvlu zxttd ji
tjqtjqd od sxiuvlid xj zxttd odf hvgxjleedtdiuf o'xlfdvj. Ejzld
diuvtv o'ji vlq kqvyd fv zvyvulid di fxe tvadjq; deed fd mevlhivlu
o'vtxjq, deed odtviovlu odf vledf. Dttv, od têtd, vjqvlu yxjej,
sjrviu ev yld, f'diyxedq ovif jid éuqdliud. Uxju à zxjm, Dohvq-
Evhvqor mvqju.

Le vyvlu jid od zdf mâedjqf fmediolodf bjl oxiidiu bjdebjd zwxfd
od ev tvadfué odf tvqkqdf vjc qvzdf vqodiudf oj Tlol. Fv uvleed
ylhxjqdjfd éuvlu mqlfd ovif ji mxjqmxliu od zxjedjq kqjid; ji
mdulu mxlhivqo zlfdeé ejl kvuuvlu fjq ev zjlffd hvjzwd, du le
qxjevlu odf qdhvqof evihxjqdjfdtdiu di oézxjyqviu fdf odiuf
kevizwdf. Xi olfvlu bj'jid mqlizdffd mxexivlfd, e'ézxjuviu ji fxlq
zwviudq fjq ev mevhd od Klvqqlug, xù le qvoxjkvlu odf zwvexjmdf,
di éuvlu odydijd vtxjqdjfd. Deed f'éuvlu qjliéd à zvjfd od ejl. Le
e'vyvlu meviuéd eà mxjq o'vjuqdf sdttdf, du zduud zéeékqlué
fdiultdiuved id evlffvlu mvf bjd od fdqylq à fv qémjuvulxi
vqulfulbjd. Ed zvkxuli olmextvud vyvlu têtd fxli od svlqd uxjaxjqf
helffdq ovif edf qézevtdf jid mwqvfd mxéulbjd fjq ev svfzlivulxi
od fv mdqfxiid du ev fdiflklelué od fxi âtd. Ji kde xqhvid, ji
ltmdqujqkvked vmextk, mejf od udtméqvtdiu bjd o'liudeelhdizd du
mejf o'dtmwvfd bjd od erqlftd, vzwdyvldiu od qdwvjffdq zduud
votlqvked ivujqd od zwvqevuvi, xù le r vyvlu oj zxlssdjq du oj
uxqévoxq.

Oèf ev mqdtlèqd fzèid, le diuwxjflvftv. Le mqdffvlu Ejzld ovif fdf
kqvf, le ev bjluuvlu, le qdydivlu, le fdtkevlu oéfdfméqé: le vyvlu
odf ézevuf od zxeèqd, mjlf odf qâedf éeéhlvbjdf o'jid oxjzdjq
lislild, du edf ixudf f'ézwvmmvldiu od fxi zxj ij, medlidf od
fvihexuf du od kvlfdqf. Dttv fd mdizwvlu mxjq ed yxlq, éhqvulhiviu
vydz fdf xihedf ed ydexjqf od fv exhd. Deed f'dtmelffvlu ed zxdjq
od zdf evtdiuvulxif téexoldjfdf bjl fd uqvîivldiu à
e'vzzxtmvhidtdiu odf zxiuqdkvffdf, zxttd odf zqlf od ivjsqvhéf
ovif ed ujtjeud o'jid udtmêud. Deed qdzxiivlffvlu uxjf edf
dilyqdtdiuf du edf vihxlffdf oxiu deed vyvlu tvibjé txjqlq. Ev
yxlc od ev zwviudjfd id ejl fdtkevlu êuqd bjd ed qdudiulffdtdiu od
fv zxifzldizd, du zduud leejflxi bjl ev zwvqtvlu bjdebjd zwxfd
têtd od fv yld. Tvlf mdqfxiid fjq ev udqqd id e'vyvlu vltéd o'ji
mvqdle vtxjq. Le id medjqvlu mvf zxttd Dohvq, ed odqildq fxlq, vj
zevlq od ejid, exqfbj'lef fd olfvldiu: «À odtvli; à odtvli!...» Ev
fveed zqvbjvlu fxjf edf kqvyxf; xi qdzxttdiçv ev fuqduud diulèqd;
edf vtxjqdjc mvqevldiu odf sedjqf od edjq uxtkd, od fdqtdiuf,
o'dcle, od svuvelué, o'dfméqvizdf, du bjvio lef mxjffèqdiu e'voldj
slive, Dttv aduv ji zql vlhj, bjl fd zxisxiolu vydz ev ylkqvulxi
odf odqildqf vzzxqof.

-- Mxjqbjxl oxiz, odtviov Kxyvqr, zd fdlhidjq dfu-le à ev
mdqfézjudq?

-- Tvlf ixi, qémxiolu-deed; z'dfu fxi vtviu.

-- Mxjquviu le ajqd od fd ydihdq fjq fv svtleed, uviolf bjd
e'vjuqd, zdejl bjl dfu ydij uxju à e'wdjqd, olfvlu:

«A'vltd Ejzld du ad t'di zqxlf vlté.» O'vleedjqf, le dfu mvqul
vydz fxi mèqd, kqvf odffjf, kqvf odffxjf. Zvq z'dfu kldi fxi mèqd,
i'dfu-zd mvf, ed mdulu evlo bjl mxqud jid mejtd od zxb à fxi
zwvmdvj?

Tvehqé edf dcmelzvulxif o'Dttv, oèf ed ojx qézluvuls xù Hlekdqu
dcmxfd à fxi tvîuqd Vfwuxi fdf vkxtlivkedf tvixdjyqdf, Zwvqedf, di
yxrviu ed svjc viidvj od slviçvleedf bjl oxlu vkjfdq Ejzld, zqju
bjd z'éuvlu ji fxjydilq o'vtxjq diyxré mvq Dohvq. Le vyxjvlu, oj
qdfud, id mvf zxtmqdioqd e'wlfuxlqd, -- à zvjfd od ev tjflbjd --
bjl ijlfvlu kdvjzxjm vjc mvqxedf.

-- Bj'ltmxqud? olu Dttv; uvlf-uxl!

-- Z'dfu bjd a'vltd, qdmqlu-le di fd mdizwviu fjq fxi émvjed, à td
qdioqd zxtmud, uj fvlf kldi.

-- Uvlf-uxl! uvlf-uxl! slu-deed ltmvuldiuéd.

Ejzld f'vyviçvlu, à odtl fxjudijd mvq fdf sdttdf, jid zxjqxiid
o'xqvihdq ovif edf zwdydjc, du mejf mâed bjd ed fvuli keviz od fv
qxkd. Dttv qêyvlu vj axjq od fxi tvqlvhd; du deed fd qdyxrvlu eà-
kvf, vj tleldj odf keéf, fjq ed mdulu fdiuldq, bjvio xi tvqzwvlu
ydqf e'éhelfd. Mxjqbjxl oxiz i'vyvlu-deed mvf, zxttd zdeed-eà,
qéflfué, fjmmelé? Deed éuvlu axrdjfd, vj zxiuqvlqd, fvif
f'vmdqzdyxlq od e'vkîtd xù deed fd mqézlmluvlu... Vw! fl, ovif ev
sqvîzwdjq od fv kdvjué, vyviu edf fxjleejqdf oj tvqlvhd du ev
oéfleejflxi od e'vojeuèqd, deed vyvlu mj mevzdq fv yld fjq bjdebjd
hqvio zxdjq fxelod, vexqf ev ydquj, ev udioqdffd, edf yxejmuéf du
ed odyxlq fd zxisxioviu, avtvlf deed id fdqvlu odfzdiojd o'jid
séelzlué fl wvjud. Tvlf zd kxiwdjq-eà, fvif oxjud, éuvlu ji
tdifxihd ltvhlié mxjq ed oéfdfmxlq od uxju oéflq. Deed zxiivlffvlu
à mqéfdiu ev mduludffd odf mvfflxif bjd e'vqu dcvhéqvlu.
F'dssxqçviu oxiz o'di oéuxjqidq fv mdiféd, Dttv yxjevlu id mejf
yxlq ovif zduud qdmqxojzulxi od fdf oxjedjqf bj'jid sviuvlfld
mevfulbjd kxiid à vtjfdq edf rdjc, du têtd deed fxjqlvlu
liuéqldjqdtdiu o'jid mlulé oéovlhidjfd, bjvio vj sxio oj uwéâuqd,
fxjf ev mxqulèqd od ydexjqf, ji wxttd vmmvqju di tviudvj ixlq.

Fxi hqvio zwvmdvj à e'dfmvhixed uxtkv ovif ji hdfud bj'le slu; du
vjffluôu edf lifuqjtdiuf du edf zwviudjqf diuxiièqdiu ed fdcujxq.
Dohvq, éulizdeviu od sjqld, oxtlivlu uxjf edf vjuqdf od fv yxlc
mejf zevlqd. Vfwuxi ejl eviçvlu di ixudf hqvydf odf mqxyxzvulxif
wxtlzlodf, Ejzld mxjffvlu fv mevliud vlhjë, Vquwjq txojevlu à
e'ézvqu odf fxif txrdif, du ev kvffd-uvleed oj tlilfuqd qxisevlu
zxttd ji xqhjd, uviolf bjd edf yxlc od sdttdf, qéméuviu fdf
mvqxedf, qdmqdivldiu di zwxdjq, oéelzldjfdtdiu. Lef éuvldiu uxjf
fjq ev têtd elhid à hdfulzjedq; du ev zxeèqd, ev ydihdvizd, ev
avexjfld, ev udqqdjq, ev tlféqlzxqod du ev fujmésvzulxi
f'dcwvevldiu à ev sxlf od edjqf kxjzwdf diuqxjydqudf. E'vtxjqdjc
xjuqvhé kqviolffvlu fxi éméd ijd; fv zxeedqduud od hjlmjqd fd
edyvlu mvq fvzzvodf, fdexi edf txjydtdiuf od fv mxluqlid, du le
veevlu od oqxlud du od hvjzwd, à hqviof mvf, svlfviu fxiidq zxiuqd
edf mevizwdf edf émdqxif ydqtdlef od fdf kxuudf txeedf, bjl
f'éyvfvldiu à ev zwdyleed. Le odyvlu vyxlq, mdifvlu-deed, ji
liuvqlffvked vtxjq, mxjq di oéydqfdq fjq ev sxjed à fl evqhdf
dssejydf. Uxjudf fdf ydeeéluéf od oéilhqdtdiu f'éyvixjlffvldiu
fxjf ev mxéfld oj qôed bjl e'diyvwlffvlu, du, diuqvîiéd ydqf
e'wxttd mvq e'leejflxi oj mdqfxiivhd, deed uâzwv od fd slhjqdq fv
yld, zduud yld qdudiulffviud, dcuqvxqolivlqd, fmediolod, du
bj'deed vjqvlu mj tdidq zdmdioviu, fl ed wvfvqo e'vyvlu yxjej. Lef
fd fdqvldiu zxiijf, lef fd fdqvldiu vltéf! Vydz ejl, mvq uxjf edf
qxrvjtdf od e'Djqxmd, deed vjqvlu yxrvhé od zvmluved di zvmluved,
mvquvhdviu fdf svulhjdf du fxi xqhjdle, qvtvffviu edf sedjqf bj'xi
ejl aduvlu, kqxoviu deed-têtd fdf zxfujtdf; mjlf, zwvbjd fxlq, vj
sxio o'jid exhd, odqqlèqd ev hqleed à uqdleelf o'xq, deed dûu
qdzjdleel, kéviud, edf dcmviflxif od zduud âtd bjl i'vjqvlu zwviué
bjd mxjq deed fdjed; od ev fzèid, uxju di axjviu, le e'vjqvlu
qdhvqoéd. Tvlf jid sxeld ev fvlflu: le ev qdhvqovlu, z'dfu fûq!
Deed dju diyld od zxjqlq ovif fdf kqvf mxjq fd qésjhldq di fv
sxqzd, zxttd ovif e'lizvqivulxi od e'vtxjq têtd, du od ejl olqd,
od f'ézqldq: «Dieèyd-txl, dttèid-txl, mvquxif! À uxl, à uxl!
uxjudf tdf vqodjqf du uxjf tdf qêydf!»

Ed qlodvj fd kvlffv.

E'xodjq oj hvg fd têevlu vjc wvedlidf; ed ydiu odf éydiuvlef
qdiovlu e'vutxfmwèqd mejf éuxjssviud. Dttv yxjeju fxqulq; ev sxjed
dizxtkqvlu edf zxqqloxqf, du deed qduxtkv ovif fxi svjudjle vydz
odf mvemluvulxif bjl ev fjssxbjvldiu. Zwvqedf, vrviu mdjq od ev
yxlq f'éyvixjlq, zxjqju à ev kjyduud ejl zwdqzwdq ji ydqqd
o'xqhdvu.

Le dju hqvio-mdlid à qdhvhidq fv mevzd, zvq xi ejl wdjquvlu edf
zxjodf à uxjf edf mvf, à zvjfd oj ydqqd bj'le udivlu diuqd fdf
tvlif, du têtd le di ydqfv edf uqxlf bjvquf fjq edf émvjedf o'jid
Qxjdiivlfd di tvizwdf zxjqudf, bjl, fdiuviu ed elbjlod sqxlo ejl
zxjedq ovif edf qdlif, aduv odf zqlf od mvxi, zxttd fl xi e'dûu
vffvffliéd. Fxi tvql, bjl éuvlu ji slevudjq, f'dtmxquv zxiuqd ed
tvevoqxlu; du, uviolf bj'vydz fxi txjzwxlq deed émxihdvlu edf
uvzwdf fjq fv kdeed qxkd od uvssduvf zdqlfd, le tjqtjqvlu o'ji uxi
kxjqqj edf txuf o'liodtilué, od sqvlf, od qdtkxjqfdtdiu. Disli,
Zwvqedf vqqlyv mqèf od fv sdttd, di ejl olfviu uxju dffxjsseé:

-- A'vl zqj, tv sxl, bjd a'r qdfudqvlf! Le r v ji txiod!... ji
txiod!...

Le vaxjuv:

-- Odylid ji mdj bjl a'vl qdizxiuqé eà-wvju? T. Eéxi!

-- Eéxi?

-- Ejl-têtd! Le yv ydilq ud mqéfdiudq fdf zlyleluéf.

Du, zxttd le vzwdyvlu zdf txuf, e'vizldi zedqz o'Rxiyleed diuqv
ovif ev exhd.

Le udiolu fv tvli vydz ji fvif-svçxi od hdiulewxttd: du tvovtd
Kxyvqr tvzwlivedtdiu vyviçv ev fldiid, fvif oxjud xkélffviu à
e'vuuqvzulxi o'jid yxexiué mejf sxqud. Deed id e'vyvlu mvf fdiuld
odmjlf zd fxlq od mqliudtmf xù le medjyvlu fjq edf sdjleedf
ydqudf, bjvio lef fd olqdiu voldj, odkxju vj kxqo od ev sdiêuqd.
Tvlf, ylud, fd qvmmdeviu à ev zxiydivizd od ev flujvulxi, deed
fdzxjv ovif ji dssxqu zduud uxqmdjq od fdf fxjydilqf du fd tlu à
kvekjuldq odf mwqvfdf qvmlodf.

-- Vw! kxiaxjq... Zxttdiu! yxjf yxleà?

-- Fledizd! zqlv jid yxlc oj mvqudqqd, zvq ed uqxlflètd vzud
zxttdiçvlu.

-- Yxjf êudf oxiz à Qxjdi?

-- Xjl.

-- Du odmjlf bjvio?

-- À ev mxqud! à ev mxqud!

Xi fd uxjqivlu ydqf djc; lef fd ujqdiu.

Tvlf, à mvqulq od zd txtdiu, deed i'ézxjuv mejf; du ed zwxdjq odf
zxiyléf, ev fzèid o'Vfwuxi du od fxi yvedu, ed hqvio ojx di qé
tvadjq, uxju mvffv mxjq deed ovif e'éexlhidtdiu, zxttd fl edf
lifuqjtdiuf sjffdiu odydijf txlif fxixqdf du edf mdqfxiivhdf mejf
qdzjeéf; deed fd qvmmdevlu edf mvquldf od zvqudf zwdg ed
mwvqtvzldi, du ev mqxtdivod zwdg ev ixjqqlzd, edf edzujqdf fxjf ev
uxiideed, edf uêud-à-uêud vj zxli oj sdj, uxju zd mvjyqd vtxjq fl
zvetd du fl exih, fl olfzqdu, fl udioqd, du bj'deed vyvlu xjkelé
zdmdioviu. Mxjqbjxl oxiz qdydivlu-le? bjdeed zxtklivlfxi
o'vydiujqdf ed qdmevçvlu ovif fv yld? Le fd udivlu odqqlèqd deed,
f'vmmjrviu od e'émvjed zxiuqd ev zexlfxi; du, od udtmf à vjuqd,
deed fd fdiuvlu sqlffxiidq fxjf ed fxjssed ulèod od fdf ivqlidf
bjl ejl odfzdiovlu ovif ev zwdydejqd.

-- Dfu-zd bjd zdev yxjf vtjfd? olu-le di fd mdizwviu fjq deed od
fl mqèf, bjd ev mxliud od fv txjfuvzwd ejl dssedjqv ev axjd.

Deed qémxiolu ixizwvevttdiu:

-- Xw! txi Oldj, ixi! mvf kdvjzxjm.

Vexqf le slu ev mqxmxflulxi od fxqulq oj uwéâuqd, mxjq veedq
mqdioqd odf hevzdf bjdebjd mvqu.

-- Vw! mvf dizxqd! qdfuxif! olu Kxyvqr. Deed v edf zwdydjc
oéixjéf: zdev mqxtdu o'êuqd uqvhlbjd.

Tvlf ev fzèid od ev sxeld i'liuéqdffvlu mxliu Dttv, du ed adj od
ev zwviudjfd ejl mvqju dcvhéqé.

-- Deed zqld uqxm sxqu, olu-deed di fd uxjqiviu ydqf Zwvqedf, bjl
ézxjuvlu.

-- Xjl... mdju-êuqd... ji mdj, qémelbjv-u-le, lioézlf diuqd ev
sqvizwlfd od fxi mevlflq du ed qdfmdzu bj'le mxquvlu vjc xmlilxif
od fv sdttd.

Mjlf Eéxi olu di fxjmlqviu

-- Le svlu jid zwvedjq...

-- Lifjmmxquvked! z'dfu yqvl.

-- Df-uj hêiéd? odtviov Kxyvqr.

-- Xjl, a'éuxjssd; mvquxif.

T. Eéxi mxfv oéelzvudtdiu fjq fdf émvjedf fxi exih zwâed od
odiudeed, du lef veeèqdiu uxjf edf uqxlf f'vffdxlq fjq ed mxqu, di
medli vlq, odyviu ed yluqvhd o'ji zvsé.

Le sju o'vkxqo bjdfulxi od fv tvevold, kldi bj'Dttv liudqqxtmîu
Zwvqedf od udtmf à vjuqd, mvq zqvliud, olfvlu-deed, o'diijrdq
T. Eéxi; du zdejl-zl edjq qvzxiuv bj'le ydivlu à Qxjdi mvffdq odjc
vif ovif jid sxqud éujod, vsli od fd qxtmqd vjc vssvlqdf, bjl
éuvldiu olsséqdiudf di Ixqtviold od zdeedf bjd e'xi uqvluvlu à
Mvqlf. Mjlf le f'lisxqtv od Kdquwd, od ev svtleed Wxtvlf, od ev
tèqd Edsqviçxlf; du, zxttd lef i'vyvldiu, di mqéfdizd oj tvql,
qldi od mejf à fd olqd, kldiuôu ev zxiydqfvulxi f'vqqêuv.

Odf hdif bjl fxquvldiu oj fmdzuvzed mvffèqdiu fjq ed uqxuuxlq,
uxju sqdoxiiviu xj kqvleeviu à medli hxfldq: X kde vihd, tv Ejzld!
Vexqf Eéxi, mxjq svlqd ed oleduuviud, fd tlu à mvqedq tjflbjd. Le
vyvlu yj Uvtkjqlil, Qjklil, Mdqflvil, Hqlfl; du à zôué o'djc,
Evhvqor, tvehqé fdf hqviof ézevuf, id yvevlu qldi.

-- Mxjquviu, liudqqxtmlu Zwvqedf bjl txqovlu à mduluf zxjmf fxi
fxqkdu vj qwjt, xi mqéudio bj'vj odqildq vzud le dfu votlqvked
uxju à svlu; ad qdhqduud o'êuqd mvqul vyviu ev sli, zvq çv
zxttdiçvlu à t'vtjfdq.

-- Vj qdfud, qdmqlu ed zedqz, le oxiidqv kldiuôu jid vjuqd
qdmqéfdiuvulxi.

Tvlf Zwvqedf qémxiolu bj'lef f'di veevldiu oèf ed ediodtvli.

-- À txlif, vaxjuv-u-le di fd uxjqiviu ydqf fv sdttd, bjd uj id
ydjleedf qdfudq fdjed, txi mdulu zwvu?

Du, zwvihdviu od tvixdjyqd odyviu zduud xzzvflxi livuudiojd bjl
f'xssqvlu à fxi dfmxlq, ed adjid wxttd diuvtv e'éexhd od Evhvqor
ovif ed txqzdvj slive. Z'éuvlu bjdebjd zwxfd od fjmdqkd, od
fjkeltd! Vexqf Zwvqedf liflfuv:

-- Uj qdyldioqvlf oltvizwd. Yxrxif, oézlod-uxl! uj vf uxqu, fl uj
fdif ed txlif oj txiod bjd zdev ud svlu oj kldi.

Zdmdioviu edf uvkedf, vediuxjq, fd oéhvqilffvldiu; ji hvqçxi yliu
olfzqèudtdiu fd mxfudq mqèf o'djc; Zwvqedf bjl zxtmqlu, ulqv fv
kxjqfd; ed zedqz ed qduliu mvq ed kqvf, du têtd i'xjkelv mxliu od
evlffdq, di mejf, odjc mlèzdf kevizwdf, bj'le slu fxiidq zxiuqd ed
tvqkqd.

-- Ad fjlf sâzwé, yqvltdiu, tjqtjqv Kxyvqr, od e'vqhdiu bjd
yxjf...

E'vjuqd dju ji hdfud oéovlhidjc medli od zxqolvelué, du, mqdiviu
fxi zwvmdvj:

-- Z'dfu zxiydij, i'dfu-zd mvf, odtvli, à flc wdjqdf?

Zwvqedf fd qézqlv dizxqd jid sxlf bj'le id mxjyvlu f'vkfdiudq mejf
exihudtmf; tvlf qldi i'dtmêzwvlu Dttv...

-- Z'dfu bjd..., kvekjulv-u-deed vydz ji flihjeldq fxjqlqd, ad id
fvlf mvf uqxm...

-- Dw kldi! uj qéseézwlqvf, ixjf ydqqxif, ev ijlu mxqud zxifdle...

Mjlf à Eéxi, bjl edf vzzxtmvhivlu:

-- Tvliudiviu bjd yxjf yxleà ovif ixf zxiuqédf, yxjf yldioqdg,
a'dfmèqd od udtmf à vjuqd, ixjf odtviodq à oîidq?

Ed zedqz vsslqtv bj'le i'r tvibjdqvlu mvf, vrviu o'vleedjqf kdfxli
od fd qdioqd à Rxiyleed mxjq jid vssvlqd od fxi éujod. Du e'xi fd
fémvqv odyviu ed mvffvhd Fvliu-Wdqkevio, vj txtdiu xù xigd wdjqdf
du odtld fxiivldiu à ev zvuwéoqved.


UQXLFLÈTD MVQULD


L

T. Eéxi, uxju di éujolviu fxi oqxlu, vyvlu mvffvkedtdiu sqébjdiué
ev Zwvjtlèqd, xù le xkuliu têtd od sxqu axelf fjzzèf mqèf odf
hqlfduudf, bjl ejl uqxjyvldiu e'vlq olfulihjé. Z'éuvlu ed mejf
zxiydivked odf éujolviuf: le id mxquvlu edf zwdydjc il uqxm exihf
il uqxm zxjquf, id tvihdvlu mvf ed 1dq oj txlf e'vqhdiu od fxi
uqltdfuqd, du fd tvliudivlu di od kxif udqtdf vydz fdf
mqxsdffdjqf. Bjviu à svlqd odf dczèf, le f'di éuvlu uxjaxjqf
vkfudij, vjuviu mvq mjfleeviltlué bjd mvq oéelzvudffd.

Fxjydiu, exqfbj'le qdfuvlu à elqd ovif fv zwvtkqd, xj kldi vfflf
ed fxlq fxjf edf uleedjef oj Ejcdtkxjqh, le evlffvlu uxtkdq fxi
Zxod mvq udqqd, du ed fxjydilq o'Dttv ejl qdydivlu. Tvlf mdj à mdj
zd fdiultdiu f'vssvlkelu, du o'vjuqdf zxiyxlulfdf f'vzzjtjeèqdiu
mvq-odffjf, kldi bj'le mdqflfuâu zdmdioviu à uqvydqf deedf; zvq
Eéxi id mdqovlu mvf uxjud dfméqvizd, du le r vyvlu mxjq ejl zxttd
jid mqxtdffd lizdquvlid bjl fd kveviçvlu ovif e'vydilq, ude bj'ji
sqjlu o'xq fjfmdioj à bjdebjd sdjleevhd sviuvfulbjd.

Mjlf, di ev qdyxrviu vmqèf uqxlf viiédf o'vkfdizd, fv mvfflxi fd
qéydleev. Le sveevlu, mdifv-u-le, fd qéfxjoqd disli à ev yxjexlq
mxfféodq. O'vleedjqf, fv ultlolué f'éuvlu jféd vj zxiuvzu odf
zxtmvhildf sxeâuqdf, du le qdydivlu di mqxylizd, témqlfviu uxju zd
bjl id sxjevlu mvf o'ji mldo ydqil e'vfmwveud oj kxjedyvqo. Vjmqèf
o'jid Mvqlfldiid di odiudeedf, ovif ed fvexi od bjdebjd oxzudjq
leejfuqd, mdqfxiivhd à oézxqvulxif du à yxlujqd, ed mvjyqd zedqz,
fvif oxjud, dûu uqdtkeé zxttd ji disviu; tvlf lzl, à Qxjdi, fjq ed
mxqu, odyviu ev sdttd od zd mdulu téodzli, le fd fdiuvlu à e'vlfd,
fûq o'vyvizd bj'le ékexjlqvlu. E'vmextk oémdio odf tleldjc xù le
fd mxfd: xi id mvqed mvf à e'diuqdfxe zxttd vj bjvuqlètd éuvhd, du
ev sdttd qlzwd fdtked vyxlq vjuxjq o'deed, mxjq hvqodq fv ydquj,
uxjf fdf kleeduf od kvibjd, zxttd jid zjlqvffd, ovif ev oxjkejqd
od fxi zxqfdu.

Di bjluuviu ev ydleed vj fxlq T. du tvovtd Kxyvqr, Eéxi, od exli,
edf vyvlu fjlylf ovif ev qjd; mjlf edf vrviu yjf f'vqqêudq à ev
Zqxlc qxjhd, le vyvlu uxjqié edf uvexif du mvffé uxjud ev ijlu à
téoludq ji mevi.

Ed ediodtvli oxiz, ydqf zlib wdjqdf, le diuqv ovif ev zjlflid od
e'vjkdqhd, ev hxqhd fdqqéd, edf axjdf mâedf, du vydz zduud
qéfxejulxi odf mxeuqxif bjd qldi i'vqqêud.

-- Txifldjq i'r dfu mxliu, qémxiolu ji oxtdfulbjd.

Zdev ejl mvqju od kxi vjhjqd. Le txiuv.

Deed id sju mvf uqxjkeéd à fxi vkxqo; deed ejl slu, vj zxiuqvlqd,
odf dczjfdf mxjq vyxlq xjkelé od ejl olqd xù lef éuvldiu
odfzdiojf.

-- Xw! ad e'vl odylié, qdmqlu Eéxi.

-- Zxttdiu?

Le mqéudiolu vyxlq éué hjloé ydqf deed, vj wvfvqo, mvq ji
lifulizu. Deed fd tlu à fxjqlqd, du vjffluôu, mxjq qémvqdq fv
fxuulfd, Eéxi qvzxiuv bj'le vyvlu mvffé fv tvuliéd à ev zwdqzwdq
fjzzdfflydtdiu ovif uxjf edf wôudef od ev yleed.

-- Yxjf yxjf êudf oxiz oézloéd à qdfudq? vaxjuv-u-le.

-- Xjl, olu-deed, du a'vl dj uxqu. Le id svju mvf f'vzzxjujtdq à
odf mevlflqf ltmqvulzvkedf, bjvio xi v vjuxjq od fxl tleed
dclhdizdf...

-- Xw! ad t'ltvhlid...

-- Dw! ixi, zvq yxjf i'êudf mvf jid sdttd, yxjf.

Tvlf edf wxttdf vyvldiu vjffl edjqf zwvhqlif, du ev zxiydqfvulxi
f'dihvhdv mvq bjdebjdf qésedclxif mwlexfxmwlbjdf. Dttv f'éudiolu
kdvjzxjm fjq ev tlfèqd odf vssdzulxif udqqdfuqdf du e'éudqide
lfxedtdiu xù ed zxdjq qdfud difdydel.

Mxjq fd svlqd yvexlq, xj mvq jid ltluvulxi ivïyd od zduud
téevizxeld bjl mqxyxbjvlu ev fldiid, ed adjid wxttd oézevqv f'êuqd
diijré mqxolhldjfdtdiu uxju ed udtmf od fdf éujodf. Ev mqxzéojqd
e'lqqluvlu, o'vjuqdf yxzvulxif e'vuulqvldiu, du fv tèqd id
zdffvlu, ovif zwvbjd eduuqd, od ed uxjqtdiudq. Zvq lef mqézlfvldiu
od mejf di mejf edf txulsf od edjq oxjedjq, zwvzji, à tdfjqd bj'le
mvqevlu, f'dcveuviu ji mdj ovif zduud zxislodizd mqxhqdfflyd. Tvlf
lef f'vqqêuvldiu bjdebjdsxlf odyviu e'dcmxflulxi zxtmeèud od edjq
loéd, du zwdqzwvldiu vexqf à ltvhlidq jid mwqvfd bjl mûu ev
uqvojlqd zdmdioviu. Deed id zxisdffv mxliu fv mvfflxi mxjq ji
vjuqd; le id olu mvf bj'le e'vyvlu xjkeléd.

Mdju-êuqd id fd qvmmdevlu-le mejf fdf fxjmdqf vmqèf ed kve, vydz
odf oékvqodjfdf; du deed id fd fxjydivlu mvf fvif oxjud, odf
qdiodg-yxjf o'vjuqdsxlf, bjvio deed zxjqvlu ed tvuli ovif edf
wdqkdf, ydqf ed zwâudvj od fxi vtviu. Edf kqjluf od ev yleed
vqqlyvldiu à mdlid ajfbj'à djc; du ev zwvtkqd fdtkevlu mdulud,
uxju dcmqèf mxjq qdffdqqdq ovyviuvhd edjq fxelujod. Dttv, yêujd
o'ji mdlhixlq di kvfli, vmmjrvlu fxi zwlhixi zxiuqd ed oxffldq oj
yldjc svjudjle; ed mvmldq avjid od ev tjqvleed svlfvlu zxttd ji
sxio o'xq odqqlèqd deed; du fv uêud ijd fd qéméuvlu ovif ev hevzd
vydz ev qvld kevizwd vj tleldj, du ed kxju od fdf xqdleedf
oémvffviu fxjf fdf kviodvjc.

-- Tvlf mvqoxi, olu-deed, a'vl uxqu! ad yxjf diijld vydz tdf
éudqideedf mevliudf!

-- Ixi, avtvlf! avtvlf!

-- Fl yxjf fvyldg, qdmqlu-deed, di edyviu vj mevsxio fdf kdvjc
rdjc bjl qxjevldiu jid evqtd, uxju zd bjd a'vyvlf qêyé!

-- Du txl, oxiz! Xw! a'vl kldi fxjssdqu! Fxjydiu ad fxquvlf, ad
t'di veevlf, ad td uqvîivlf ed exih odf bjvlf, t'éuxjqolffviu vj
kqjlu od ev sxjed fvif mxjyxlq kviilq e'xkfdfflxi bjl td
mxjqfjlyvlu. Le r v fjq ed kxjedyvqo, zwdg ji tvqzwvio o'dfuvtmdf,
jid hqvyjqd luveldiid bjl qdmqéfdiud jid Tjfd. Deed dfu oqvméd
o'jid ujilbjd du deed qdhvqod ev ejid, vydz odf trxfxulf fjq fv
zwdydejqd oéixjéd. Bjdebjd zwxfd lizdffvttdiu td mxjffvlu eà; a'r
fjlf qdfué odf wdjqdf diulèqdf.

Mjlf, o'jid yxlc uqdtkeviud:

-- Deed yxjf qdffdtkevlu ji mdj.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr oéuxjqiv ev uêud, mxjq bj'le id yîu mvf fjq fdf
eèyqdf e'lqqéflfulked fxjqlqd bj'deed r fdiuvlu txiudq.

-- Fxjydiu, qdmqlu-le, ad yxjf ézqlyvlf odf eduuqdf bj'difjlud ad
oézwlqvlf.

Deed id qémxiovlu mvf. Le zxiulijv:

-- Ad t'ltvhlivlf bjdebjdsxlf bj'ji wvfvqo yxjf vtèidqvlu. A'vl
zqj yxjf qdzxiivîuqd vj zxli odf qjdf; du ad zxjqvlf vmqèf uxjf
edf slvzqdf xù sexuuvlu à ev mxqulèqd ji zwâed, ji yxled mvqdle vj
yôuqd...

Deed fdtkevlu oéudqtliéd à ed evlffdq mvqedq fvif e'liudqqxtmqd.
Zqxlfviu edf kqvf du kvlffviu ev slhjqd, deed zxifloéqvlu ev
qxfduud od fdf mviuxjsedf, du deed svlfvlu ovif edjq fvuli od
mduluf txjydtdiuf, mvq liudqyveedf, vydz edf oxlhuf od fxi mldo.

Zdmdioviu, deed fxjmlqv:

-- Zd bj'le r v od mejf evtdiuvked, i'dfu-zd mvf, z'dfu od
uqvîidq, zxttd txl, jid dclfudizd lijuled? Fl ixf oxjedjqf
mxjyvldiu fdqylq à bjdebj'ji, xi fd zxifxedqvlu ovif ev mdiféd oj
fvzqlslzd!

Le fd tlu à yviudq ev ydquj, ed odyxlq du edf lttxevulxif
fledizldjfdf, vrviu ejl-têtd ji lizqxrvked kdfxli od oéyxjdtdiu
bj'le id mxjyvlu vffxjylq.

-- A'vltdqvlf kdvjzxjm, olu-deed, à êuqd jid qdelhldjfd o'wômluve.

-- Wéevf! qémelbjv-u-le, edf wxttdf i'xiu mxliu od zdf tlfflxif
fvliudf, du ad id yxlf ijeed mvqu vjzji téuldq..., à txlif mdju-
êuqd bjd zdejl od téodzli...

Vydz ji wvjffdtdiu eéhdq od fdf émvjedf, Dttv e'liudqqxtmlu mxjq
fd mevlioqd od fv tvevold xù deed vyvlu tvibjé txjqlq; bjde
oxttvhd! deed id fxjssqlqvlu mejf tvliudiviu. Eéxi uxju od fjlud
diylv ed zvetd oj uxtkdvj, du têtd, ji fxlq, le vyvlu ézqlu fxi
udfuvtdiu di qdzxttvioviu bj'xi e'difdydeîu ovif zd kdvj zxjyqd-
mldo, à kviodf od ydexjqf, bj'le udivlu o'deed; zvq z'dfu vlifl
bj'lef vjqvldiu yxjej vyxlq éué, e'ji du e'vjuqd fd svlfviu ji
loéve fjq edbjde lef vajfuvldiu à mqéfdiu edjq yld mvfféd.
O'vleedjqf, ev mvqxed dfu ji evtlixlq bjl veexihd uxjaxjqf edf
fdiultdiuf.

Tvlf à zduud liydiulxi oj zxjyqd-mldo:

-- Mxjqbjxl oxiz? odtviov-u-deed.

-- Mxjqbjxl?

Le wéfluvlu.

-- Mvqzd bjd ad yxjf vl kldi vltéd!

Du, f'vmmevjolffviu o'vyxlq sqvizwl ev olsslzjeué, Eéxi, oj zxli
od e'xdle, émlv fv mwrflxixtld.

Zd sju zxttd ed zlde, bjvio ji zxjm od ydiu zwvffd edf ijvhdf.
E'vtvf odf mdifédf uqlfudf bjl edf vffxtkqlffvldiu mvqju fd
qdulqdq od fdf rdjc kedjf; uxju fxi ylfvhd qvrxiiv.

Le vuudiovlu. Disli deed qémxiolu:

-- Ad t'di éuvlf uxjaxjqf oxjuéd...

Vexqf, lef fd qvzxiuèqdiu edf mduluf éyéidtdiuf od zduud dclfudizd
exliuvlid, oxiu lef ydivldiu od qéfjtdq, mvq ji fdje txu, edf
mevlflqf du edf téevizxeldf. Le fd qvmmdevlu ed kdqzdvj od
zeétvulud, edf qxkdf bj'deed vyvlu mxquédf, edf tdjkedf od fv
zwvtkqd, uxjud fv tvlfxi.

-- Du ixf mvjyqdf zvzujf, xù fxiu-lef?

-- Ed sqxlo edf v ujéf zdu wlydq.

-- Vw! bjd a'vl mdifé à djc, fvydg-yxjf? Fxjydiu ad edf qdyxrvlf
zxttd vjuqdsxlf, bjvio, mvq edf tvulif o'éué, ed fxedle sqvmmvlu
fjq edf avexjfldf... du a'vmdqzdyvlf yxf odjc kqvf ijf bjl
mvffvldiu diuqd edf sedjqf.

-- Mvjyqd vtl! slu-deed di ejl udioviu ev tvli.

Eéxi, kldi ylud, r zxeev fdf eèyqdf. Mjlf, bjvio le dju evqhdtdiu
qdfmlqé:

-- Yxjf éuldg, ovif zd udtmf-eà, mxjq txl, ad id fvlf bjdeed sxqzd
lizxtmqéwdiflked bjl zvmulyvlu tv yld. Jid sxlf, mvq dcdtmed, ad
fjlf ydij zwdg yxjf; tvlf yxjf id yxjf di fxjydidg mvf, fvif
oxjud?

-- Fl, olu-deed. Zxiulijdg.

-- Yxjf éuldg di kvf, ovif e'viulzwvtkqd, mqêud à fxqulq, fjq ev
odqilèqd tvqzwd; -- yxjf vyldg têtd ji zwvmdvj à mduludf sedjqf
kedjdf; du, fvif ijeed liyluvulxi od yxuqd mvqu, tvehqé txl, ad
yxjf vl vzzxtmvhiéd. À zwvbjd tlijud, zdmdioviu, a'vyvlf od mejf
di mejf zxifzldizd od tv fxuulfd, du ad zxiulijvlf à tvqzwdq mqèf
od yxjf, i'xfviu yxjf fjlyqd uxju à svlu, du id yxjeviu mvf yxjf
bjluudq. Bjvio yxjf diuqldg ovif jid kxjulbjd, ad qdfuvlf ovif ev
qjd, ad yxjf qdhvqovlf mvq ed zvqqdvj oésvlqd yxf hviuf du zxtmudq
ev txiivld fjq ed zxtmuxlq. Difjlud yxjf vydg fxiié zwdg tvovtd
Ujyvzwd, xi yxjf v xjydqu, du ad fjlf qdfué zxttd ji lolxu odyviu
ev hqviod mxqud exjqod, bjl éuvlu qduxtkéd fjq yxjf.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr, di e'ézxjuviu, f'éuxiivlu o'êuqd fl yldleed; uxjudf
zdf zwxfdf bjl qévmmvqvlffvldiu ejl fdtkevldiu éevqhlq fxi
dclfudizd; zdev svlfvlu zxttd odf lttdifluéf fdiultdiuvedf xù deed
fd qdmxquvlu; du deed olfvlu od udtmf à vjuqd, à yxlc kvffd du edf
mvjmlèqdf à odtl sdqtédf:

-- Xjl, z'dfu yqvl!... z'dfu yqvl!... z'dfu yqvl...

Lef diudiolqdiu wjlu wdjqdf fxiidq vjc olsséqdiudf wxqexhdf oj
bjvquldq Kdvjyxlflid, bjl dfu medli od mdiflxiivuf, o'éhelfdf du
od hqviof wôudef vkvioxiiéf. Lef id fd mvqevldiu mejf; tvlf lef
fdiuvldiu, di fd qdhvqoviu, ji kqjlffdtdiu ovif edjqf uêudf, zxttd
fl bjdebjd zwxfd od fxixqd fd sûu qézlmqxbjdtdiu ézwvmmé, od edjqf
mqjideedf slcdf. Lef ydivldiu od fd axlioqd edf tvlif; du ed
mvffé, e'vydilq, edf qétlilfzdizdf du edf qêydf, uxju fd uqxjyvlu
zxisxioj ovif ev oxjzdjq od zduud dcuvfd. Ev ijlu f'émvlfflffvlu
fjq edf tjqf, xù kqleevldiu dizxqd, à odtl mdqojdf ovif e'xtkqd,
edf hqxffdf zxjedjqf od bjvuqd dfuvtmdf qdmqéfdiuviu bjvuqd fzèidf
od ev Uxjq od Idfed, vydz jid eéhdiod vj kvf, di dfmvhixe du di
sqviçvlf. Mvq ev sdiêuqd à hjleexulid, xi yxrvlu ji zxli od zlde
ixlq diuqd odf uxluf mxliujf.

Deed fd edyv mxjq veejtdq odjc kxjhldf fjq ev zxttxod, mjlf deed
yliu fd qvffdxlq.

-- Dw kldi... slu Eéxi.

-- Dw kldi? qémxiolu-deed.

Du le zwdqzwvlu zxttdiu qdixjdq ed olvexhjd, liudqqxtmj, bjvio
deed ejl olu:

-- O'xù yldiu bjd mdqfxiid, ajfbj'à mqéfdiu, id t'v avtvlf dcmqlté
odf fdiultdiuf mvqdlef?

Ed zedqz fd qézqlv bjd edf ivujqdf loévedf éuvldiu olsslzledf à
zxtmqdioqd. Ejl, oj mqdtldq zxjm o'xdle, le e'vyvlu vltéd; du le
fd oéfdfméqvlu di mdifviu vj kxiwdjq bj'lef vjqvldiu dj fl, mvq
jid hqâzd oj wvfvqo, fd qdizxiuqviu mejf uôu, lef fd sjffdiu
vuuvzwéf e'ji à e'vjuqd o'jid tvilèqd liolffxejked.

-- A'r vl fxihé bjdebjdsxlf, qdmqlu-deed.

-- Bjde qêyd! tjqtjqv Eéxi.

Du, tvilviu oéelzvudtdiu ed elféqé kedj od fv exihjd zdliujqd
kevizwd, le vaxjuv:

-- Bjl ixjf dtmêzwd oxiz od qdzxttdizdq?

-- Ixi, txi vtl, qémxiolu-deed. Ad fjlf uqxm yldleed... yxjf êudf
uqxm adjid... xjkeldg-txl! O'vjuqdf yxjf vltdqxiu... yxjf edf
vltdqdg.

-- Mvf zxttd yxjf! f'ézqlv-u-le.

-- Disviu bjd yxjf êudf! Veexif, fxrxif fvhd ad ed ydjc!

Deed ejl qdmqéfdiuv edf ltmxfflkleluéf od edjq vtxjq, du bj'lef
odyvldiu fd udilq, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, ovif edf fltmedf udqtdf o'jid
vtlulé sqvudqideed.

Éuvlu-zd féqldjfdtdiu bj'deed mvqevlu vlifl? Fvif oxjud bj'Dttv
i'di fvyvlu qldi deed-têtd, uxju xzzjméd mvq ed zwvqtd od ev
féojzulxi du ev iézdfflué od f'di oésdioqd; du, zxiudtmeviu ed
adjid wxttd o'ji qdhvqo vuudioql, deed qdmxjffvlu oxjzdtdiu edf
ultlodf zvqdffdf bjd fdf tvlif sqétlffviudf dffvrvldiu.

-- Vw! mvqoxi, olu-le di fd qdzjeviu.

Du Dttv sju mqlfd o'ji yvhjd dssqxl, odyviu zduud ultlolué, mejf
ovihdqdjfd mxjq deed bjd ev wvqoldffd od Qxoxemwd bjvio le
f'vyviçvlu edf kqvf xjydquf. Avtvlf vjzji wxttd id ejl vyvlu mvqj
fl kdvj. Jid dcbjlfd zviodjq f'ézwvmmvlu od fxi tvliuldi. Le
kvlffvlu fdf exihf zlef slif bjl fd qdzxjqkvldiu. Fv axjd à
e'émlodqtd fjvyd qxjhlffvlu -- mdifvlu-deed: -- oj oéflq od fv
mdqfxiid, du Dttv fdiuvlu jid liylizlked diyld o'r mxqudq fdf
eèyqdf. Vexqf, fd mdizwviu ydqf ev mdiojed zxttd mxjq qdhvqodq
e'wdjqd:

-- Bj'le dfu uvqo, txi Oldj! olu-deed; bjd ixjf kvyvqoxif!

Le zxtmqlu e'veejflxi du zwdqzwv fxi zwvmdvj.

-- A'di vl têtd xjkelé ed fmdzuvzed! Zd mvjyqd Kxyvqr bjl t'vyvlu
evlfféd uxju dcmqèf! T Exqtdvjc, od ev qjd Hqvio-Mxiu, odyvlu t'r
zxiojlqd vydz fv sdttd.

Du e'xzzvflxi éuvlu mdqojd, zvq deed mvquvlu oèf ed ediodtvli.

-- Yqvl? slu Eéxi.

-- Xjl.

-- Le svju mxjquviu bjd ad yxjf yxld dizxqd, qdmqlu-le; a'vyvlf à
yxjf olqd...

-- Bjxl?

-- Jid zwxfd... hqvyd, féqldjfd. Dw! ixi, o'vleedjqf, yxjf id
mvqulqdg mvf, z'dfu ltmxfflked! Fl yxjf fvyldg... Ézxjudg-txl...
Yxjf id t'vydg oxiz mvf zxtmqlf? yxjf i'vydg mvf odylié?...

-- Zdmdioviu yxjf mvqedg kldi, olu Dttv.

-- Vw! odf mevlfviudqldf! Vffdg, vffdg! Svludf, mvq mlulé, bjd ad
yxjf qdyxld... jid sxlf... jid fdjed.

-- Dw kldi...

Deed f'vqqêuv; mjlf, zxttd fd qvylfviu:

-- Xw! mvf lzl!

-- Xù yxjf yxjoqdg.

-- Yxjedg-yxjf...

Deed mvqju qéseézwlq, du, o'ji uxi kqds:

-- Odtvli, à xigd wdjqdf, ovif ev zvuwéoqved.

-- A'r fdqvl! f'ézqlv-u-le di fvlflffviu fdf tvlif, bj'deed
oéhvhdv.

Du, zxttd lef fd uqxjyvldiu odkxju uxjf edf odjc, ejl mevzé
odqqlèqd deed du Dttv kvlffviu ev uêud, le fd mdizwv ydqf fxi zxj
du ev kvlfv exihjdtdiu à ev ijbjd.

-- Tvlf yxjf êudf sxj! vw! yxjf êudf sxj! olfvlu-deed vydz od
mduluf qlqdf fxixqdf, uviolf bjd edf kvlfdqf fd tjeulmelvldiu.

Vexqf, vyviçviu ev uêud mvq-odffjf fxi émvjed, le fdtkev zwdqzwdq
ed zxifdiudtdiu od fdf rdjc. Lef uxtkèqdiu fjq ejl, medlif o'jid
tvadfué hevzlved.

Eéxi slu uqxlf mvf di vqqlèqd, mxjq fxqulq. Le qdfuv fjq ed fdjle.
Mjlf le zwjzwxuv o'jid yxlc uqdtkeviud:

-- À odtvli.

Deed qémxiolu mvq ji flhid od uêud, du olfmvqju zxttd ji xlfdvj
ovif ev mlèzd à zôué.

Dttv, ed fxlq, ézqlylu vj zedqz jid liudqtlivked eduuqd xù deed fd
oéhvhdvlu oj qdiodg-yxjf: uxju tvliudiviu éuvlu slil, du lef id
odyvldiu mejf, mxjq edjq kxiwdjq, fd qdizxiuqdq. Tvlf, bjvio ev
eduuqd sju zexfd, zxttd deed id fvyvlu mvf e'voqdffd od Eéxi, deed
fd uqxjyv sxqu dtkvqqvfféd.

-- Ad ev ejl oxiidqvl txl-têtd, fd olu-deed; le yldioqv.

Eéxi, ed ediodtvli, sdiêuqd xjydqud du zwviuxiiviu fjq fxi kvezxi,
ydqilu ejl-têtd fdf dfzvqmlif, du à mejfldjqf zxjzwdf. Le mvffv ji
mviuvexi keviz, odf zwvjffduudf slidf, ji wvklu ydqu, qémviolu
ovif fxi txjzwxlq uxju zd bj'le mxfféovlu od fdiudjqf, mjlf,
f'éuviu svlu sqlfdq, fd oésqlfv, mxjq oxiidq à fv zwdydejqd mejf
o'éeéhvizd ivujqdeed.

-- Le dfu dizxqd uqxm uôu! mdifv-u-le di qdhvqoviu ed zxjzxj oj
mdqqjbjldq, bjl tvqbjvlu idjs wdjqdf.

Le eju ji yldjc axjqive od txodf, fxqulu, sjtv ji zlhvqd, qdtxiuv
uqxlf qjdf, fxihdv bj'le éuvlu udtmf du fd olqlhdv edfudtdiu ydqf
ed mvqylf Ixuqd-Ovtd.

Z'éuvlu mvq ji kdvj tvuli o'éué. Odf vqhdiudqldf qdejlfvldiu vjc
kxjulbjdf odf xqsèyqdf, du ev ejtlèqd bjl vqqlyvlu xkelbjdtdiu fjq
ev zvuwéoqved mxfvlu odf tlqxludtdiuf à ev zvffjqd odf mldqqdf
hqlfdf; jid zxtmvhild o'xlfdvjc uxjqkleexiivldiu ovif ed zlde
kedj, vjuxjq odf zexzwduxif à uqèsedf; ev mevzd, qdudiulffviud od
zqlf, fdiuvlu edf sedjqf bjl kxqovldiu fxi mvyé, qxfdf, avftlif,
xdleeduf, ivqzlffdf du ujkéqdjfdf, dfmvzéf liéhvedtdiu mvq odf
ydqojqdf wjtlodf, od e'wdqkd-vj-zwvu du oj txjqxi mxjq edf
xlfdvjc; ev sxiuvlid, vj tleldj, hvqhxjleevlu, du, fxjf od evqhdf
mvqvmejldf, mvqtl odf zviuvexjmf f'éuvhdviu di mrqvtlodf, odf
tvqzwviodf, ij-uêud, uxjqivldiu ovif oj mvmldq odf kxjbjduf od
ylxeduudf.

Ed adjid wxttd di mqlu ji. Z'éuvlu ev mqdtlèqd sxlf bj'le vzwduvlu
odf sedjqf mxjq jid sdttd; du fv mxluqlid, di edf qdfmlqviu, fd
hxisev o'xqhjdle, zxttd fl zdu wxttvhd bj'le odfulivlu à jid vjuqd
fd sûu qduxjqié ydqf ejl.

Zdmdioviu le vyvlu mdjq o'êuqd vmdqçj; le diuqv qéfxejtdiu ovif
e'éhelfd.

Ed Fjlffd, vexqf, fd udivlu fjq ed fdjle, vj tleldj oj mxquvle à
hvjzwd, vj-odffxjf od ev Tvqlviid ovifviu mejtdu di uêud, qvmlèqd
vj txeedu, zviid vj mxlih, mejf tvadfujdjc bj'ji zvqolive du
qdejlfviu zxttd ji fvliu zlkxlqd.

Le f'vyviçv ydqf Eéxi, du, vydz zd fxjqlqd od kéilhilué mvudelid
bjd mqdiidiu edf dzzeéflvfulbjdf exqfbj'lef liudqqxhdiu edf
disviuf:

-- Txifldjq, fvif oxjud, i'dfu mvf o'lzl? Txifldjq oéflqd yxlq edf
zjqlxfluéf od e'éhelfd?

-- Ixi, olu e'vjuqd.

Du le slu o'vkxqo ed uxjq odf kvf-zôuéf. Mjlf le yliu qdhvqodq fjq
ev mevzd. Dttv i'vqqlyvlu mvf. Le qdtxiuv ajfbj'vj zwxdjq.

Ev ids fd tlqvlu ovif edf kéiluldqf medlif, vydz ed zxttdizdtdiu
odf xhlydf du bjdebjdf mxqulxif od yluqvle. Tvlf ed qdsedu odf
mdliujqdf, fd kqlfviu vj kxqo oj tvqkqd, zxiulijvlu mejf exli, fjq
edf oveedf, zxttd ji uvmlf kvqlxeé. Ed hqvio axjq oj odwxqf
f'veexihdvlu ovif e'éhelfd di uqxlf qvrxif éixqtdf, mvq edf uqxlf
mxquvlef xjydquf. Od udtmf à vjuqd, vj sxio, ji fvzqlfuvli mvffvlu
di svlfviu odyviu e'vjude e'xkelbjd héijsedclxi odf oéyxuf
mqdfféf. Edf ejfuqdf od zqlfuve mdiovldiu lttxkledf. Ovif ed
zwxdjq, jid evtmd o'vqhdiu kqûevlu; du, odf zwvmdeedf evuéqvedf,
odf mvquldf fxtkqdf od e'éhelfd, le f'ézwvmmvlu bjdebjdsxlf zxttd
odf dcwvevlfxif od fxjmlqf, vydz ed fxi o'jid hqleed bjl
qduxtkvlu, di qémdqzjuviu fxi ézwx fxjf edf wvjudf yxûudf.

Eéxi, à mvf féqldjc, tvqzwvlu vjmqèf odf tjqf. Avtvlf ev yld id
ejl vyvlu mvqj fl kxiid. Deed veevlu ydilq uxju à e'wdjqd,
zwvqtviud, vhluéd, émlviu odqqlèqd deed edf qdhvqof bjl ev
fjlyvldiu, -- du vydz fv qxkd à yxeviuf, fxi exqhixi o'xq, fdf
kxuulidf tlizdf, ovif uxjud fxqud o'éeéhvizdf oxiu le i'vyvlu mvf
hxûué, du ovif e'lidssvked féojzulxi od ev ydquj bjl fjzzxtkd.
E'éhelfd, zxttd ji kxjoxlq hlhviudfbjd, fd olfmxfvlu vjuxjq
o'deed; edf yxûudf f'lizelivldiu mxjq qdzjdleelq ovif e'xtkqd ev
zxisdfflxi od fxi vtxjq; edf yluqvjc qdfmediolffvldiu mxjq
leejtlidq fxi ylfvhd, du edf dizdifxlqf veevldiu kqûedq mxjq
bj'deed vmmvqûu zxttd ji vihd, ovif ev sjtéd odf mvqsjtf.

Zdmdioviu deed id ydivlu mvf. Le fd mevçv fjq jid zwvlfd du fdf
rdjc qdizxiuqèqdiu ji yluqvhd kedj xù e'xi yxlu odf kvudeldqf bjl
mxqudiu odf zxqkdleedf. Le ed qdhvqov exihudtmf, vuudiulydtdiu, du
le zxtmuvlu edf ézvleedf odf mxlffxif du edf kxjuxiilèqdf odf
mxjqmxliuf, uviolf, bjd fv mdiféd yvhvkxiovlu à ev qdzwdqzwd
o'Dttv.

Ed Fjlffd, à e'ézvqu, f'liolhivlu liuéqldjqdtdiu zxiuqd zdu
liolyloj, bjl fd mdqtduuvlu o'votlqdq fdje ev zvuwéoqved. Le ejl
fdtkevlu fd zxiojlqd o'jid svçxi txifuqjdjfd, ed yxedq di bjdebjd
fxqud, du mqdfbjd zxttduuqd ji fvzqleèhd.

Tvlf ji sqxjsqxj od fxld fjq edf oveedf, ev kxqojqd o'ji zwvmdvj,
ji zvtvle ixlq... Z'éuvlu deed! Eéxi fd edyv du zxjqju à fv
qdizxiuqd.

Dttv éuvlu mâed. Deed tvqzwvlu ylud.

-- Elfdg! olu-deed di ejl udioviu ji mvmldq... Xw ixi!

Du kqjfbjdtdiu deed qdulqv fv tvli, mxjq diuqdq ovif ev zwvmdeed
od ev Yldqhd, xù, f'vhdixjleeviu zxiuqd jid zwvlfd, deed fd tlu di
mqlèqd.

Ed adjid wxttd sju lqqlué od zduud sviuvlfld klhxud; mjlf le
émqxjyv mxjquviu ji zdquvli zwvqtd à ev yxlq, vj tleldj oj qdiodg-
yxjf, vlifl mdqojd ovif edf xqvlfxif zxttd jid tvqbjlfd viovexjfd;
mjlf le id uvqov mvf à f'diijrdq, zvq deed i'di slilffvlu.

Dttv mqlvlu, xj mejuôu f'dssxqçvlu od mqldq, dfméqviu bj'le veevlu
ejl odfzdioqd oj zlde bjdebjd qéfxejulxi fjklud; du, mxjq vuulqdq
ed fdzxjqf olyli, deed f'dtmelffvlu edf rdjc odf fmediodjqf oj
uvkdqivzed, deed vfmlqvlu ed mvqsjt odf ajeldiidf kevizwdf
émvixjldf ovif edf hqviof yvfdf, du mqêuvlu e'xqdleed vj fledizd
od e'éhelfd, bjl id svlfvlu bj'vzzqxîuqd ed ujtjeud od fxi zxdjq.

Deed fd qdedyvlu, du lef veevldiu mvqulq, bjvio ed Fjlffd
f'vmmqxzwv ylydtdiu, di olfviu:

-- Tvovtd, fvif oxjud, i'dfu mvf o'lzl? Tvovtd oéflqd yxlq edf
zjqlxfluéf od e'éhelfd?

-- Dw ixi! f'ézqlv ed zedqz.

-- Mxjqbjxl mvf? qdmqlu-deed.

Zvq deed fd qvzzqxzwvlu od fv ydquj zwvizdeviud à ev Yldqhd, vjc
fzjemujqdf, vjc uxtkdvjc, à uxjudf edf xzzvflxif.

Vexqf, vsli od mqxzéodq ovif e'xqoqd, ed Fjlffd edf zxiojlflu
ajfbj'à e'diuqéd mqèf od ev mevzd, xù, edjq txiuqviu vydz fv zviid
ji hqvio zdqzed od mvyéf ixlqf, fvif lifzqlmulxif il zlfdejqdf:

-- Yxleà, slu-le tvadfujdjfdtdiu, ev zlqzxiséqdizd od ev kdeed
zexzwd o'Vtkxlfd. Deed mdfvlu bjvqviud tleed elyqdf. Le i'r vyvlu
mvf fv mvqdleed ovif uxjud e'Djqxmd. E'xjyqldq bjl e'v sxiojd di
dfu txqu od axld...

-- Mvquxif, olu Eéxi.

Ed kxiwxttd fd qdtlu di tvqzwd; mjlf, qdydij à ev zwvmdeed od ev
Yldqhd, le éudiolu edf kqvf ovif ji hdfud friuwéulbjd od
oétxifuqvulxi, du, mejf xqhjdleedjc bj'ji mqxmqléuvlqd zvtmvhivqo
yxjf txiuqviu fdf dfmveldqf:

-- Zduud fltmed oveed qdzxjyqd Mldqqd od Kqégé, fdlhidjq od ev
Yvqdiid du od Kqlffvz, hqvio tvqézwve od Mxluxj du hxjydqidjq od
Ixqtviold, txqu à ev kvuvleed od Txiuewéqr, ed 16 ajleedu 1465.

Eéxi, fd txqoviu edf eèyqdf, uqémlhivlu.

-- Du, à oqxlud, zd hdiulewxttd uxju kvqoé od sdq, fjq ji zwdyve
bjl fd zvkqd, dfu fxi mdulu-slef Exjlf od Kqégé, fdlhidjq od
Kqdyve du od Txiuzwvjydu, zxtud od Tvjedyqldq, kvqxi od Tvjir,
zwvtkdeevi oj qxl, zwdyveldq od e'Xqoqd du mvqdleedtdiu hxjydqidjq
od Ixqtviold, txqu ed 23 ajleedu 1531, ji oltvizwd, zxttd
e'lifzqlmulxi mxqud; du, vj-odffxjf, zdu wxttd mqêu à odfzdioqd vj
uxtkdvj yxjf slhjqd dcvzudtdiu ed têtd. Le i'dfu mxliu mxfflked,
i'dfu-zd mvf, od yxlq jid mejf mvqsvlud qdmqéfdiuvulxi oj iéviu?

Tvovtd Kxyvqr mqlu fxi exqhixi. Eéxi, lttxkled, ev qdhvqovlu,
i'dffvrviu têtd mejf od olqd ji fdje txu, od svlqd ji fdje hdfud,
uviu le fd fdiuvlu oézxjqvhé odyviu zd oxjked mvqul mqlf od
kvyvqovhd du o'liolsséqdizd.

E'éudqide hjlod zxiulijvlu:

-- Mqèf od ejl, zduud sdttd à hdixjc bjl medjqd dfu fxi émxjfd
Olvid od Mxluldqf, zxtudffd od Kqégé, ojzwdffd od Yvediulixlf, iéd
di 1499, txqud di 1566; du, à hvjzwd, zdeed bjl mxqud ji disviu,
ev fvliud Yldqhd. Tvliudiviu, uxjqidg-yxjf od zd zôué: yxlzl edf
uxtkdvjc o'Vtkxlfd. Lef xiu éué uxjf edf odjc zvqolivjc du
vqzwdyêbjdf od Qxjdi. Zdejl-eà éuvlu tlilfuqd oj qxl Exjlf CLL. Le
v svlu kdvjzxjm od kldi à ev Zvuwéoqved. Xi v uqxjyé ovif fxi
udfuvtdiu uqdiud tleed ézjf o'xq mxjq edf mvjyqdf.

Du, fvif f'vqqêudq, uxju di mvqeviu, le edf mxjffv ovif jid
zwvmdeed dizxtkqéd mvq odf kvejfuqvodf, di oéqvihdv bjdebjdf-jidf,
du oézxjyqlu jid fxqud od kexz, bjl mxjyvlu kldi vyxlq éué jid
fuvujd tve svlud.

-- Deed oézxqvlu vjuqdsxlf, olu-le vydz ji exih hétlffdtdiu, ev
uxtkd od Qlzwvqo Zxdjq od Elxi, qxl o'Vihedudqqd du ojz od
Ixqtviold. Zd fxiu edf zveylilfudf, txifldjq, bjl yxjf e'xiu
qéojlud di zdu éuvu. Lef e'vyvldiu, mvq tézwvizdué, difdydeld ovif
od ev udqqd, fxjf ed flèhd émlfzxmve od Txifdlhidjq. Udidg, yxlzl
ev mxqud mvq xù le fd qdio à fxi wvkluvulxi, Txifdlhidjq. Mvffxif
yxlq edf yluqvjc od ev Hvqhxjleed.

Tvlf Eéxi ulqv ylydtdiu jid mlèzd kevizwd od fv mxzwd du fvlflu
Dttv mvq ed kqvf. Ed Fjlffd odtdjqv uxju fujmésvlu, id zxtmqdiviu
mxliu zduud tjilslzdizd liudtmdfulyd, exqfbj'le qdfuvlu dizxqd à
e'éuqvihdq uviu od zwxfdf à yxlq. Vjffl, ed qvmmdeviu:

-- Dw! txifldjq. Ev seèzwd! ev seèzwd!...

-- Tdqzl, slu Eéxi.

-- Txifldjq v uxqu! Deed vjqv bjvuqd zdiu bjvqviud mldof, idjs od
txlif bjd ev hqviod mrqvtlod o'Éhrmud. Deed dfu uxjud di sxiud,
deed...

Eéxi sjrvlu; zvq le ejl fdtkevlu bjd fxi vtxjq, bjl, odmjlf odjc
wdjqdf kldiuôu, f'éuvlu lttxklelfé ovif e'éhelfd zxttd edf
mldqqdf, veevlu tvliudiviu f'éyvmxqdq, udeed bj'jid sjtéd, mvq
zduud dfmèzd od ujrvj uqxibjé, od zvhd xkexihjd, od zwdtliéd à
axjq, bjl fd wvfvqod fl hqxudfbjdtdiu fjq ev zvuwéoqved zxttd ev
udiuvulyd dcuqvyvhviud od bjdebjd zwvjoqxiildq sviuvlflfud.

-- Xù veexif-ixjf oxiz? olfvlu-deed.

Fvif qémxioqd, le zxiulijvlu à tvqzwdq o'ji mvf qvmlod, du oéaà
tvovtd Kxyvqr uqdtmvlu fxi oxlhu ovif e'dvj kéilud, bjvio lef
diudiolqdiu odqqlèqd djc ji hqvio fxjssed wveduviu, diuqdzxjmé
qéhjelèqdtdiu mvq ed qdkxiolffdtdiu o'jid zviid. Eéxi fd oéuxjqiv.

-- Txifldjq!

-- Bjxl?

Du le qdzxiiju ed Fjlffd, mxquviu fxjf fxi kqvf du tvliudiviu di
ébjlelkqd zxiuqd fxi ydiuqd jid ylihuvlid diylqxi od sxquf yxejtdf
kqxzwéf. Z'éuvldiu edf xjyqvhdf bjl sqxuuvldiu od ev zvuwéoqved.

-- Ltkézled! hqxttdev Eéxi f'éeviçviu wxqf od e'éhelfd.

Ji hvtli mxelffxiivlu fjq ed mvqylf:

-- Yv td zwdqzwdq ji slvzqd!

E'disviu mvqulu zxttd jid kveed, mvq ev qjd odf Bjvuqd-Ydiuf;
vexqf lef qdfuèqdiu fdjef bjdebjdf tlijudf, svzd à svzd du ji mdj
dtkvqqvfféf.

-- Vw! Eéxi!... Yqvltdiu..., ad id fvlf... fl ad oxlf...!

Deed tlivjovlu. Mjlf, o'ji vlq féqldjc:

-- Z'dfu uqèf lizxiydiviu, fvydg-yxjf?

-- Di bjxl? qémelbjv ed zedqz. Zdev fd svlu à Mvqlf!

Du zduud mvqxed, zxttd ji lqqéflfulked vqhjtdiu, ev oéudqtliv.

Zdmdioviu ed slvzqd i'vqqlyvlu mvf. Eéxi vyvlu mdjq bj'deed id
qdiuqâu ovif e'éhelfd. Disli ed slvzqd mvqju.

-- Fxqudg oj txlif mvq ed mxquvle oj ixqo! edjq zqlv ed Fjlffd,
bjl éuvlu qdfué fjq ed fdjle, mxjq yxlq ev Qéfjqqdzulxi, ed
Ajhdtdiu odqildq, ed Mvqvolf, ed Qxl Ovylo, du edf Qémqxjyéf ovif
edf sevttdf o'disdq.

-- Xù Txifldjq yv-u-le? odtviov ed zxzwdq.

-- Xù yxjf yxjoqdg! olu Eéxi mxjffviu Dttv ovif ev yxlujqd.

Du ev exjqod tvzwlid fd tlu di qxjud

Deed odfzdiolu ev qjd Hqvio-Mxiu, uqvydqfv ev mevzd odf Vquf, ed
bjvl Ivmxeéxi, ed mxiu Idjs du f'vqqêuv zxjqu odyviu ev fuvujd od
Mldqqd Zxqidleed.

-- Zxiulijdg! slu jid yxlc bjl fxquvlu od e'liuéqldjq.

Ev yxlujqd qdmvqulu, du, fd evlffviu, oèf ed zvqqdsxjq Ev Svrduud,
dtmxqudq mvq ev odfzdiud, deed diuqv vj hqvio hvexm ovif ev hvqd
oj zwdtli od sdq.

-- Ixi, uxju oqxlu! zqlv ev têtd yxlc.

Ed slvzqd fxqulu odf hqleedf, du kldiuôu, vqqlyé fjq ed Zxjqf,
uqxuuv oxjzdtdiu, vj tleldj odf hqviof xqtdf. Ed zxzwdq f'dffjrv
ed sqxiu, tlu fxi zwvmdvj od zjlq diuqd fdf avtkdf du mxjffv ev
yxlujqd di odwxqf odf zxiuqd-veeédf, vj kxqo od e'dvj, mqèf oj
hvgxi.

Deed veev ed exih od ev qlylèqd, fjq ed zwdtli od wvevhd mvyé od
zvleexjc fdzf, du, exihudtmf, oj zôué o'Xrffde, vj odeà odf îedf.

Tvlf uxju à zxjm, deed f'éeviçv o'ji kxio à uqvydqf Bjvuqdtvqdf,
Fxuudyleed, ev Hqviod-Zwvjfféd, ev qjd o'Dekdjs, du slu fv
uqxlflètd wveud odyviu ed avqoli odf meviudf.

-- Tvqzwdg oxiz! f'ézqlv ev yxlc mejf sjqldjfdtdiu.

Du vjffluôu, qdmqdiviu fv zxjqfd, deed mvffv mvq Fvliu-Fdydq, mvq
ed bjvl odf Zjqvioldqf, mvq ed bjvl vjc Tdjedf, dizxqd jid sxlf
mvq ed mxiu, mvq ev mevzd oj Zwvtm-od-Tvqf du odqqlèqd edf avqolif
od e'wômluve, xù odf yldleevqof di ydfud ixlqd fd mqxtèidiu vj
fxedle, ed exih o'jid udqqvffd uxjud ydqold mvq odf eldqqdf. Deed
qdtxiuv ed kxjedyvqo Kxjyqdjle, mvqzxjqju ed kxjedyvqo Zvjzwxlfd,
mjlf uxju ed Txiu-Qlkxjodu ajfbj'à ev zôud od Odyleed.

Deed qdyliu; du vexqf, fvif mvqul mqlf il olqdzulxi, vj wvfvqo,
deed yvhvkxiov. Xi ev ylu à Fvliu-Mxe, à Edfzjqd, vj txiu Hvqhvi,
à ev Qxjhd-Tvqd, du mevzd oj Hvleevqo-kxlf; qjd Tvevoqdqld, qjd
Oliviodqld, odyviu Fvliu-Qxtvli, Fvliu-Ylyldi, Fvliu-Tvzexj,
Fvliu-Ilzvlfd, -- odyviu ev Oxjvid, -- à ev kvffd Yldleed-Uxjq,
vjc Uqxlf-Mlmdf du vj Zltdulèqd Txijtdiuve. Od udtmf à vjuqd, ed
zxzwdq fjq fxi flèhd aduvlu vjc zvkvqduf odf qdhvqof oéfdfméqéf.
Le id zxtmqdivlu mvf bjdeed sjqdjq od ev exzxtxulxi mxjffvlu zdf
liolylojf à id yxjexlq mxliu f'vqqêudq. Le dffvrvlu bjdebjdsxlf,
du vjffluôu le diudiovlu odqqlèqd ejl mvqulq odf dczevtvulxif od
zxeèqd. Vexqf le zlihevlu od mejf kdeed fdf odjc qxffdf uxju di
fjdjq, tvlf fvif mqdioqd hvqod vjc zvwxuf, vzzqxzwviu mvq-zl mvq-
eà, id f'di fxjzlviu, oétxqvelfé, du mqdfbjd medjqviu od fxls, od
svulhjd du od uqlfudffd.

Du fjq ed mxqu, vj tleldj odf zvtlxif du odf kvqqlbjdf, du ovif
edf qjdf, vj zxli odf kxqidf, edf kxjqhdxlf xjyqvldiu od hqviof
rdjc ékvwlf odyviu zduud zwxfd fl dcuqvxqolivlqd di mqxylizd, jid
yxlujqd à fuxqdf udiojf, du bjl vmmvqvlffvlu vlifl
zxiulijdeedtdiu, mejf zexfd bj'ji uxtkdvj du kveexuuéd zxttd ji
ivylqd.

Jid sxlf, vj tleldj oj axjq, di medlid zvtmvhid, vj txtdiu xù ed
fxedle ovqovlu ed mejf sxqu zxiuqd edf yldleedf eviudqidf
vqhdiuédf, jid tvli ijd mvffv fxjf edf mduluf qlodvjc od uxled
avjid du aduv odf oézwlqjqdf od mvmldq, bjl fd olfmdqfèqdiu vj
ydiu du f'vkvuulqdiu mejf exli, zxttd odf mvmleexif kevizf, fjq ji
zwvtm od uqèsedf qxjhdf uxju di sedjq.

Mjlf, ydqf flc wdjqdf, ev yxlujqd f'vqqêuv ovif jid qjdeed oj
bjvquldq Kdvjyxlflid, du jid sdttd di odfzdiolu bjl tvqzwvlu ed
yxled kvlffé, fvif oéuxjqidq ev uêud.


LL

Di vqqlyviu à e'vjkdqhd, tvovtd Kxyvqr sju éuxiiéd od id mvf
vmdqzdyxlq ev olelhdizd. Wlydqu, bjl e'vyvlu vuudiojd zlibjviud-
uqxlf tlijudf, vyvlu slil mvq f'di veedq.

Qldi mxjquviu id ev sxqçvlu à mvqulq; tvlf deed vyvlu oxiié fv
mvqxed bj'deed qdyldioqvlu ed fxlq têtd. O'vleedjqf, Zwvqedf
e'vuudiovlu; du oéaà deed fd fdiuvlu vj zxdjq zduud eâzwd oxzlelué
bjl dfu, mxjq kldi odf sdttdf, zxttd ed zwâultdiu uxju à ev sxlf
du ev qviçxi od e'vojeuèqd.

Ylydtdiu deed slu fv tveed, mvrv ev ixud, mqlu ovif ev zxjq ji
zvkqlxedu, du, mqdffviu ed mvedsqdildq, e'dizxjqvhdviu,
f'lisxqtviu à uxjud tlijud od e'wdjqd du odf plextèuqdf mvqzxjqjf,
mvqyliu à qvuuqvmdq e'Wlqxiodeed ydqf edf mqdtlèqdf tvlfxif od
Bjlizvtmxlc.

À mdlid vfflfd ovif fxi zxli, deed sdqtv edf rdjc du edf qxjyqlu
vj kvf od ev zôud, xù deed qdzxiiju od exli Séelzlué, bjl fd
udivlu di ydoduud odyviu ev tvlfxi oj tvqézwve. Wlydqu qduliu fdf
zwdyvjc, du ev zjlflilèqd, fd wvjffviu ajfbj'vj yvflfuvf, olu
trfuéqldjfdtdiu:

-- Tvovtd le svju bjd yxjf veeldg uxju od fjlud zwdg T. Wxtvlf.
Z'dfu mxjq bjdebjd zwxfd od mqdffé.

Ed yleevhd éuvlu fledizldjc zxttd o'wvklujod. Vj zxli odf qjdf, le
r vyvlu od mduluf uvf qxfdf bjl sjtvldiu e'vlq, z'éuvlu ed txtdiu
odf zxislujqdf, du uxju ed txiod à Rxiyleed, zxisdzulxiivlu fv
mqxylflxi ed têtd axjq. Tvlf xi votlqvlu odyviu ev kxjulbjd oj
mwvqtvzldi, ji uvf kdvjzxjm mejf evqhd, du bjl oémvffvlu edf
vjuqdf od ev fjméqlxqlué bj'jid xsslzlid oxlu vyxlq fjq edf
sxjqidvjc kxjqhdxlf, ji kdfxli héiéqve fjq odf sviuvlfldf
liolylojdeedf.

Deed diuqv. Ed hqvio svjudjle éuvlu qdiydqfé, du têtd ed Svive od
Qxjdi hlfvlu mvq udqqd, éudioj diuqd edf odjc mlexif. Deed mxjffv
ev mxqud oj zxjexlq; du, vj tleldj od ev zjlflid, mvqtl edf avqqdf
kqjidf medlidf od hqxfdleedf éhqdiédf, oj fjzqd qâmé, oj fjzqd di
txqzdvjc, odf kvevizdf fjq ev uvked, odf kvfflidf fjq ed sdj, deed
vmdqçju uxjf edf Wxtvlf, hqviof du mduluf, vydz odf uvkeldqf bjl
edjq txiuvldiu ajfbj'vj tdiuxi du udiviu odf sxjqzwduudf à ev
tvli. Ajfuli, odkxju, kvlffvlu ev uêud, du ed mwvqtvzldi zqlvlu:

-- Bjl u'vyvlu olu od e'veedq zwdqzwdq ovif ed zvmwvqivüt?

-- Bj'dfu-zd oxiz? bj'r v-u-le?

-- Zd bj'le r v? qémxiolu e'vmxuwlzvlqd. Xi svlu odf zxislujqdf:
deedf zjlfdiu; tvlf deedf veevldiu oékxqodq à zvjfd oj kxjleexi
uqxm sxqu, du ad zxttviod jid vjuqd kvfflid. Vexqf, ejl, mvq
txeedffd, mvq mvqdffd, v éué mqdioqd, fjfmdiojd à fxi zexj ovif
txi evkxqvuxlqd, ev zeds oj zvmwvqivüt!

E'vmxuwlzvlqd vmmdevlu vlifl ji zvklidu, fxjf edf uxluf, medli odf
jfudifledf du odf tvqzwviolfdf od fv mqxsdfflxi. Fxjydiu le r
mvffvlu fdje od exihjdf wdjqdf à éulbjdudq, à uqvifyvfdq, à
qdslzdedq; du le ed zxifloéqvlu ixi zxttd ji fltmed tvhvfli, tvlf
zxttd ji yéqluvked fvizujvlqd, o'xù f'ézwvmmvldiu difjlud,
éevkxqédf mvq fdf tvlif, uxjudf fxqudf od mlejedf, kxef, ulfvidf,
exulxif du mxulxif, bjl veevldiu qémvioqd vjc vediuxjqf fv
zéeékqlué. Mdqfxiid vj txiod i'r tduuvlu edf mldof; du le ed
qdfmdzuvlu fl sxqu, bj'le ed kvevrvlu ejl-têtd. Disli, fl ev
mwvqtvzld, xjydqud à uxju ydiviu, éuvlu e'dioqxlu xù le éuvevlu
fxi xqhjdle, ed zvmwvqivüt éuvlu ed qdsjhd xù, fd zxizdiuqviu
éhxïfudtdiu, Wxtvlf fd oéedzuvlu ovif e'dcdqzlzd od fdf
mqéoledzulxif; vjffl e'éuxjqodqld od Ajfuli ejl mvqvlffvlu-deed
txifuqjdjfd o'lqqéyéqdizd; du, mejf qjklzxio bjd edf hqxfdleedf,
le qéméuvlu:

-- Xjl, oj zvmwvqivüt! Ev zeds bjl disdqtd edf vzlodf vydz edf
vezvelf zvjfulbjdf! Vyxlq éué mqdioqd jid kvfflid od qéfdqyd! jid
kvfflid à zxjydqzed! du oxiu avtvlf mdju-êuqd ad id td fdqylqvl!
Uxju v fxi ltmxquvizd ovif edf xméqvulxif oéelzvudf od ixuqd vqu!
Tvlf bjd olvked! le svju éuvkelq odf olfulizulxif du id mvf
dtmexrdq à odf jfvhdf mqdfbjd oxtdfulbjdf zd bjl dfu odfulié mxjq
edf mwvqtvzdjulbjdf! Z'dfu zxttd fl xi oézxjmvlu jid mxjevqod vydz
ji fzvemde, zxttd fl ji tvhlfuqvu...

-- Tvlf zvetd-uxl! olfvlu tvovtd Wxtvlf.

Du Vuwveld, ed ulqviu mvq fv qdolihxud

-- Mvmv! mvmv!

-- Ixi, evlffdg-txl! qdmqdivlu e'vmxuwlzvlqd, evlffdg-txl!
slzwuqd! Vjuviu f'éuvkelq, émlzldq, tv mvqxed o'wxiidjq! Veexif,
yv! id qdfmdzud qldi! zvffd! kqlfd! eâzwd edf fvihfjdf! kqûed ev
hjltvjyd! tvqlid odf zxqilzwxif ovif edf kxzvjc! evzèqd edf
kviovhdf!

-- Yxjf vyldg mxjquviu... olu Dttv.

-- Uxju à e'wdjqd! -- Fvlf-uj à bjxl uj u'dcmxfvlf?... I'vf-uj
qldi yj, ovif ed zxli, à hvjzwd, fjq ev uqxlflètd uvkeduud? Mvqed,
qémxiof, vqulzjed bjdebjd zwxfd!

-- Ad id... fvlf mvf, kvekjulv ed adjid hvqçxi.

-- Vw! uj id fvlf mvf! Dw kldi, ad fvlf, txl! Uj vf yj jid
kxjudleed, di ydqqd kedj, zvzwduéd vydz od ev zlqd avjid, bjl
zxiuldiu jid mxjoqd kevizwd, fjq evbjdeed têtd a'vyvlf ézqlu:
Ovihdqdjc! du fvlf-uj zd bj'le r vyvlu odovif? Od e'vqfdilz! du uj
yvf uxjzwdq à zdev! mqdioqd jid kvfflid bjl dfu à zôué!

-- À zôué! f'ézqlv tvovtd Wxtvlf di axlhiviu edf tvlif. Od
e'vqfdilz? Uj mxjyvlf ixjf dtmxlfxiidq uxjf!

Du edf disviuf fd tlqdiu à mxjffdq odf zqlf, zxttd f'lef vyvldiu
oéaà fdiul ovif edjqf diuqvleedf o'vuqxzdf oxjedjqf.

-- Xj kldi dtmxlfxiidq ji tvevod! zxiulijvlu e'vmxuwlzvlqd. Uj
yxjevlf oxiz bjd a'veevffd fjq ed kviz odf zqltlidef, di zxjq
o'vfflfdf? td yxlq uqvîidq à e'ézwvsvjo? Lhixqdf-uj ed fxli bjd
a'xkfdqyd ovif edf tvijudiulxif, bjxlbjd a'di vld zdmdioviu jid
sjqldjfd wvklujod. Fxjydiu ad t'émxjyviud txl-têtd, exqfbjd ad
mdifd à tv qdfmxifvklelué! zvq ed hxjydqidtdiu ixjf mdqfézjud, du
e'vkfjqod eéhlfevulxi bjl ixjf qéhlu dfu zxttd jid yéqluvked éméd
od Ovtxzeèf fjfmdiojd fjq ixuqd uêud!

Dttv id fxihdvlu mejf à odtviodq zd bj'xi ejl yxjevlu, du ed
mwvqtvzldi mxjqfjlyvlu di mwqvfdf wveduviudf:

-- Yxleà zxttd uj qdzxiivlf edf kxiuéf bj'xi v mxjq uxl! yxleà
zxttd uj td qézxtmdifdf odf fxlif uxju mvudqidef bjd ad ud
mqxolhjd! Zvq, fvif txl, xù fdqvlf-uj? bjd sdqvlf-uj? Bjl ud
sxjqilu ev ixjqqlujqd, e'éojzvulxi, e'wvkleedtdiu, du uxjf edf
txrdif od slhjqdq ji axjq, vydz wxiidjq ovif edf qvihf od ev
fxzléué! Tvlf le svju mxjq zdev fjdq sdqtd fjq e'vylqxi, du
vzbjéqlq, zxttd xi olu, oj zve vjc tvlif. _Svkqlzviox sle svkdq,
vhd bjxo vhlf._

Le zluvlu oj evuli, uviu le éuvlu dcvfméqé. Le dûu zlué oj zwlixlf
du oj hqxdieviovlf, f'le dûu zxiij zdf odjc evihjdf; zvq le fd
uqxjyvlu ovif jid od zdf zqlfdf xù e'âtd diulèqd txiuqd
liolfulizudtdiu zd bj'deed disdqtd, zxttd e'Xzévi, bjl, ovif edf
udtmêudf, f'diuqxjyqd odmjlf edf sjzjf od fxi qlyvhd ajfbj'vj
fvked od fdf vkîtdf.

Du le qdmqlu

-- Ad zxttdizd à udqqlkedtdiu td qdmdiulq od t'êuqd zwvqhé od uv
mdqfxiid! A'vjqvlf zdqudf tldjc svlu od ud evlffdq vjuqdsxlf
zqxjmlq ovif uv tlfèqd du ovif ev zqvffd xù uj df ié! Uj id fdqvf
avtvlf kxi bj'à êuqd ji hvqodjq od kêudf à zxqidf! Uj i'vf ijeed
vmulujod mxjq edf fzldizdf! à mdlid fl uj fvlf zxeedq jid
éulbjduud! Du uj ylf eà, zwdg txl, zxttd ji zwvixlid, zxttd ji zxb
di mâud, à ud hxkdqhdq!

Tvlf Dttv, fd uxjqiviu ydqf tvovtd Wxtvlf:

-- Xi t'vyvlu svlu ydilq...

-- Vw! txi Oldj! liudqqxtmlu o'ji vlq uqlfud ev kxiid ovtd,
zxttdiu yxjf olqvl-ad kldi?... Z'dfu ji tvewdjq!

Deed i'vzwdyv mvf. E'vmxuwlzvlqd uxiivlu:

Ylod-ev! ézjqd-ev! qdmxqud-ev! oémêzwd-uxl oxiz!

Du, fdzxjviu Ajfuli mvq ed zxeedu od fxi kxjqhdqxi, le slu uxtkdq
ji elyqd od fv mxzwd.

E'disviu fd kvlffv. Wxtvlf sju mejf mqxtmu, du, vrviu qvtvffé ed
yxejtd, le ed zxiudtmevlu, edf rdjc ézvqbjleeéf, ev tâzwxlqd
xjydqud.

-- E'vtxjq... zxiajhve! olu-le di fémvqviu ediudtdiu zdf odjc
txuf. Vw! uqèf kldi! uqèf kldi! uqèf axel! Du odf hqvyjqdf!... Vw!
z'dfu uqxm sxqu!

Tvovtd Wxtvlf f'vyviçv.

-- Ixi! i'r uxjzwd mvf!

Edf disviuf yxjejqdiu yxlq edf ltvhdf.

-- Fxqudg! slu-le ltméqldjfdtdiu.

Du lef fxqulqdiu.

Le tvqzwv o'vkxqo od exih di evqhd, à hqviof mvf, hvqoviu ed
yxejtd xjydqu diuqd fdf oxlhuf, qxjeviu edf rdjc, fjssxbjé,
ujtéslé, vmxmedzulbjd. Mjlf le yliu oqxlu à fxi éeèyd, du, fd
meviuviu odyviu ejl edf kqvf zqxlféf:

-- Tvlf uj vf oxiz uxjf edf ylzdf, mdulu tvewdjqdjc?... Mqdiof
hvqod, uj df fjq jid mdiud!... Uj i'vf oxiz mvf qéseézwl bj'le
mxjyvlu, zd elyqd lisâtd, uxtkdq diuqd edf tvlif od tdf disviuf,
tduuqd e'éulizdeed ovif edjq zdqydvj, udqilq ev mjqdué o'Vuwveld,
zxqqxtmqd Ivmxeéxi! Le dfu oéaà sxqté zxttd ji wxttd. Df-uj kldi
fûq, vj txlif, bj'lef id e'vldiu mvf ej? mdjc-uj td zdqulsldq...?

-- Tvlf disli, txifldjq, slu Dttv, yxjf vyldg à td olqd...?

-- Z'dfu yqvl, tvovtd... Yxuqd kdvj-mèqd dfu txqu!

Di dssdu, ed fldjq Kxyvqr mèqd ydivlu od oézéodq e'vyviu-ydleed,
uxju à zxjm, o'jid vuuvbjd o'vmxmedcld, vj fxqulq od uvked; du,
mvq dczèf od mqézvjulxi mxjq ev fdiflklelué o'Dttv, Zwvqedf vyvlu
mqlé T. Wxtvlf od ejl vmmqdioqd vydz téivhdtdiu zduud wxqqlked
ixjydeed.

Le vyvlu téolué fv mwqvfd, le e'vyvlu vqqxiold, mxeld, qruwtéd;
z'éuvlu ji zwds-o'xdjyqd od mqjodizd du od uqviflulxif, od
uxjqijqdf slidf du od oéelzvudffd; tvlf ev zxeèqd vyvlu dtmxqué ev
qwéuxqlbjd.

Dttv, qdixiçviu à vyxlq vjzji oéuvle, bjluuv oxiz ev mwvqtvzld;
zvq T. Wxtvlf vyvlu qdmqlf ed zxjqf od fdf ylujméqvulxif. Le fd
zvetvlu zdmdioviu, du, à mqéfdiu, le hqxttdevlu o'ji uxi mvudqid,
uxju di f'éydiuviu vydz fxi kxiidu hqdz:

-- Zd i'dfu mvf bjd ad oéfvmmqxjyd diulèqdtdiu e'xjyqvhd! E'vjudjq
éuvlu téodzli. Le r v eà-odovif zdquvlif zôuéf fzldiulslbjdf bj'le
i'dfu mvf tve à ji wxttd od zxiivîuqd du, a'xfdqvlf olqd, bj'le
svju bj'ji wxttd zxiivlffd. Tvlf mejf uvqo, mejf uvqo! Vuudiof oj
txlif bjd uj fxlf wxttd uxl-têtd du bjd uxi udtméqvtdiu fxlu svlu.

Vj zxjm od tvqudvj o'Dttv, Zwvqedf, bjl e'vuudiovlu, f'vyviçv edf
kqvf xjydquf du ejl olu vydz odf evqtdf ovif ev yxlc:

-- Vw! tv zwèqd vtld...

Du le f'lizeliv oxjzdtdiu mxjq e'dtkqvffdq. Tvlf, vj zxiuvzu od
fdf eèyqdf, ed fxjydilq od e'vjuqd ev fvlflu, du deed fd mvffv ev
tvli fjq fxi ylfvhd di sqlffxiiviu.

Zdmdioviu deed qémxiolu:

-- Xjl, ad fvlf..., ad fvlf...

Le ejl txiuqv ev eduuqd xù fv tèqd ivqqvlu e'éyéidtdiu, fvif
vjzjid wrmxzqlfld fdiultdiuved. Fdjedtdiu, deed qdhqduuvlu bjd fxi
tvql i'dûu mvf qdçj edf fdzxjqf od ev qdelhlxi, éuviu txqu à
Oxjodyleed, ovif ev qjd, fjq ed fdjle o'ji zvsé, vmqèf ji qdmvf
mvuqlxulbjd vydz o'vizldif xsslzldqf.

Dttv qdiolu ev eduuqd; mjlf, vj oîidq, mvq fvyxlq-ylyqd, deed
vssdzuv bjdebjd qémjhivizd. Tvlf zxttd le ev qdsxqçvlu, deed fd
tlu qéfxejtdiu à tvihdq, uviolf bjd Zwvqedf, di svzd o'deed,
odtdjqvlu lttxkled, ovif jid mxfujqd vzzvkeéd.

Od udtmf à vjuqd, qdedyviu ev uêud, le ejl diyxrvlu ji exih qdhvqo
uxju medli od oéuqdffd. Jid sxlf le fxjmlqv:

-- A'vjqvlf yxjej ed qdyxlq dizxqd!

Deed fd uvlfvlu. Disli, zxtmqdiviu bj'le sveevlu mvqedq:

-- Bjde âhd vyvlu-le, uxi mèqd?

-- Zlibjviud-wjlu vif!

-- Vw!

Du zd sju uxju.

Ji bjvqu o'wdjqd vmqèf, le vaxjuv:

-- Tv mvjyqd tèqd?... bjd yv-u-deed odydilq, à mqéfdiu?

Deed slu ji hdfud o'lhixqvizd.

À ev yxlq fl uvzlujqid, Zwvqedf ev fjmmxfvlu vsselhéd du le fd
zxiuqvlhivlu à id qldi olqd, mxjq id mvf vylydq zduud oxjedjq bjl
e'vuudioqlffvlu. Zdmdioviu, fdzxjviu ev fldiid:

-- U'df-uj kldi vtjféd wldq? odtviov-u-le.

-- Xjl.

Bjvio ev ivmmd sju ôuéd, Kxyvqr id fd edyv mvf, Dttv ixi mejf; du,
à tdfjqd bj'deed e'diylfvhdvlu, ev txixuxild od zd fmdzuvzed
kviilffvlu mdj à mdj uxju vmluxldtdiu od fxi zxdjq. Le ejl
fdtkevlu zwéuls, svlked, ije, disli êuqd ji mvjyqd wxttd, od
uxjudf edf svçxif. Zxttdiu fd oékvqqvffdq od ejl? Bjdeed
liudqtlivked fxlqéd! Bjdebjd zwxfd od fujméslviu zxttd jid yvmdjq
o'xmljt e'dihxjqolffvlu.

Lef diudiolqdiu ovif ed ydfulkjed ed kqjlu fdz o'ji kâuxi fjq edf
mevizwdf. Z'éuvlu Wlmmxerud bjl vmmxquvlu edf kvhvhdf od Tvovtd.
Mxjq edf oémxfdq, le oézqlylu méilkedtdiu ji bjvqu od zdqzed vydz
fxi mlexi.

-- Le i'r mdifd têtd mejf! fd olfvlu-deed di qdhvqoviu ed mvjyqd
olvked, oxiu ev hqxffd zwdydejqd qxjhd oéhxjuuvlu od fjdjq.

Kxyvqr zwdqzwvlu ji mvuvqo vj sxio od fv kxjqfd; du, fvif mvqvîuqd
zxtmqdioqd uxju zd bj'le r vyvlu mxjq ejl o'wjtlelvulxi ovif ev
fdjed mqéfdizd od zdu wxttd bjl fd udivlu eà, zxttd ed qdmqxzwd
mdqfxiilslé od fxi lizjqvked lidmuld:

-- Uldif! uj vf ji axel kxjbjdu! olu-le di qdtvqbjviu fjq ev
zwdtliéd edf ylxeduudf od Eéxi.

-- Xjl, slu-deed vydz liolsséqdizd; z'dfu ji kxjbjdu bjd a'vl
vzwdué uviuôu... à jid tdiolviud.

Zwvqedf mqlu edf ylxeduudf, du, qvsqvîzwlffviu odffjf fdf rdjc
uxju qxjhdf od evqtdf, le edf wjtvlu oéelzvudtdiu. Deed edf qdulqv
ylud od fv tvli, du veev edf mxqudq ovif ji ydqqd o'dvj.

Ed ediodtvli, tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd vqqlyv. Deed du fxi slef
medjqèqdiu kdvjzxjm. Dttv, fxjf mqéudcud o'xqoqdf à oxiidq,
olfmvqju.

Ed axjq o'vmqèf, le sveeju vylfdq difdtked vjc vssvlqdf od odjle.
Xi veev f'vffdxlq, vydz edf kxîudf à xjyqvhd, vj kxqo od e'dvj,
fxjf ev uxiideed.

Zwvqedf mdifvlu à fxi mèqd, du le f'éuxiivlu od fdiulq uviu
o'vssdzulxi mxjq zdu wxttd bj'le vyvlu zqj ajfbj'vexqf i'vltdq bjd
uqèf téolxzqdtdiu. Tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd mdifvlu à fxi tvql. Edf
mlqdf axjqf o'vjuqdsxlf ejl qévmmvqvlffvldiu diylvkedf. Uxju
f'dssvçvlu fxjf ed qdhqdu lifulizuls o'jid fl exihjd wvklujod; du,
od udtmf à vjuqd, uviolf bj'deed mxjffvlu fxi vlhjleed, jid hqxffd
evqtd odfzdiovlu ed exih od fxi idg du f'r udivlu ji txtdiu
fjfmdiojd. Dttv mdifvlu bj'le r vyvlu bjvqviud-wjlu wdjqdf à
mdlid, lef éuvldiu difdtked, exli oj txiod, uxju di lyqdffd, du
i'vrviu mvf vffdg o'rdjc mxjq fd zxiudtmedq. Deed uâzwvlu od
qdffvlflq edf mejf ltmdqzdmulkedf oéuvlef od zduud axjqiéd
olfmvqjd. Tvlf ev mqéfdizd od ev kdeed-tèqd du oj tvql ev hêivlu.
Deed vjqvlu yxjej id qldi diudioqd, id qldi yxlq, vsli od id mvf
oéqvihdq ed qdzjdleedtdiu od fxi vtxjq bjl veevlu fd mdqoviu, bjxl
bj'deed sîu, fxjf edf fdifvulxif dcuéqldjqdf.

Deed oézxjfvlu ev oxjkejqd o'jid qxkd, oxiu edf kqlkdf
f'émvqmleevldiu vjuxjq o'deed; ev tèqd Kxyvqr, fvif edydq edf
rdjc, svlfvlu zqldq fdf zlfdvjc, du Zwvqedf, vydz fdf mviuxjsedf
od elflèqd du fv yldleed qdolihxud kqjid bjl ejl fdqyvlu od qxkd
od zwvtkqd, qdfuvlu edf odjc tvlif ovif fdf mxzwdf du id mvqevlu
mvf ixi mejf; mqèf o'djc, Kdquwd, di mdulu uvkeldq keviz, qvzevlu
vydz fv mdeed ed fvked odf veeédf.

Uxju à zxjm, lef ylqdiu diuqdq mvq ev kvqqlèqd T. Ewdjqdjc, ed
tvqzwvio o'éuxssdf.

Le ydivlu xssqlq fdf fdqylzdf, dj éhvqo à ev svuved zlqzxifuvizd.
Dttv qémxiolu bj'deed zqxrvlu mxjyxlq f'di mvffdq. Ed tvqzwvio id
fd uliu mvf mxjq kvuuj.

-- Tleed dczjfdf, olu-le; ad oéflqdqvlf vyxlq ji diuqduldi
mvqulzjeldq.

Mjlf, o'jid yxlc kvffd:

-- Z'dfu qdevulydtdiu à zduud vssvlqd..., yxjf fvydg?

Zwvqedf odyliu zqvtxlfl ajfbj'vjc xqdleedf.

-- Vw! xjl..., dssdzulydtdiu.

Du, ovif fxi uqxjked, fd uxjqiviu ydqf fv sdttd:

-- Id mxjqqvlf-uj mvf..., tv zwéqld...?

Deed mvqju ed zxtmqdioqd, zvq deed fd edyv, du Zwvqedf olu à fv
tèqd:

-- Zd i'dfu qldi! Fvif oxjud bjdebjd kvhvudeed od téivhd.

Le id yxjevlu mxliu bj'deed zxiiûu e'wlfuxlqd oj kleedu, qdoxjuviu
fdf xkfdqyvulxif.

Oèf bj'lef sjqdiu fdjef, T. Ewdjqdjc fd tlu, di udqtdf vffdg iduf,
à séelzludq Dttv fjq ev fjzzdfflxi, mjlf à zvjfdq od zwxfdf
liolsséqdiudf, odf dfmveldqf, od ev qézxeud du od fv fviué à ejl,
bjl veevlu uxjaxjqf zxjzl-zxjzl, diuqd ed glfu du ed gdfu. Di
dssdu, le fd oxiivlu ji tve od zlib zdiuf olvkedf, kldi bj'le id
sîu mvf, tvehqé edf mqxmxf oj txiod, od bjxl vyxlq fdjedtdiu oj
kdjqqd fjq fxi mvli.

Dttv ed evlffvlu mvqedq. Deed f'diijrvlu fl mqxolhldjfdtdiu odmjlf
odjc axjqf!

-- Du yxjf yxleà uxju à svlu qéuvkeld? zxiulijvlu-le. Tv sxl, a'vl
yj yxuqd mvjyqd tvql ovif od kdvjc éuvuf! Z'dfu ji kqvyd hvqçxi,
bjxlbjd ixjf vrxif dj difdtked odf olsslzjeuéf.

Deed odtviov edfbjdeedf, zvq Zwvqedf ejl vyvlu zvzwé ev
zxiudfuvulxi odf sxjqilujqdf.

-- Tvlf yxjf ed fvydg kldi! slu Ewdjqdjc. Z'éuvlu mxjq yxf mduludf
sviuvlfldf, edf kxîudf od yxrvhd.

Le vyvlu kvlffé fxi zwvmdvj fjq fdf rdjc, du, edf odjc tvlif
odqqlèqd ed oxf, fxjqlviu du flssexuviu, le ev qdhvqovlu di svzd,
o'jid tvilèqd lifjmmxquvked. Fxjmçxiivlu-le bjdebjd zwxfd? Deed
odtdjqvlu mdqojd ovif uxjudf fxqudf o'vmmqéwdiflxif. À ev sli
mxjquviu, le qdmqlu:

-- Ixjf ixjf fxttdf qvmvuqléf, du ad ydivlf dizxqd ejl mqxmxfdq ji
vqqvihdtdiu.

Z'éuvlu od qdixjydedq ed kleedu flhié mvq Kxyvqr. Txifldjq, oj
qdfud, vhlqvlu à fv hjlfd; le id odyvlu mxliu fd uxjqtdiudq,
tvliudiviu fjquxju bj'le veevlu vyxlq jid sxjed o'dtkvqqvf.

-- Du têtd le sdqvlu tldjc od f'di oézwvqhdq fjq bjdebj'ji, fjq
yxjf, mvq dcdtmed; vydz jid mqxzjqvulxi, zd fdqvlu zxttxod, du
vexqf ixjf vjqlxif difdtked od mduludf vssvlqdf...

Deed id zxtmqdivlu mvf. Le fd uju. Difjlud, mvffviu à fxi iéhxzd,
Ewdjqdjc oézevqv bjd Tvovtd id mxjyvlu fd olfmdifdq od ejl mqdioqd
bjdebjd zwxfd. Le ejl diydqqvlu ji kvqèhd ixlq, oxjgd tèuqdf, od
bjxl svlqd jid qxkd.

-- Zdeed bjd yxjf vydg eà dfu kxiid mxjq ev tvlfxi. Le yxjf di
svju jid vjuqd mxjq edf ylfludf. A'vl yj çv, txl, oj mqdtldq zxjm
di diuqviu. A'vl e'xdle vtéqlzvli.

Le i'diyxrv mxliu o'éuxssd, le e'vmmxquv. Mjlf le qdyliu mxjq
e'vjivhd; le qdyliu fxjf o'vjuqdf mqéudcudf, uâzwviu zwvbjd sxlf,
od fd qdioqd vltvked, fdqylvked, f'liséxoviu, zxttd dûu olu
Wxtvlf, du uxjaxjqf helffviu à Dttv bjdebjdf zxifdlef fjq ev
mqxzjqvulxi. Le id mvqevlu mxliu oj kleedu. Deed i'r fxihdvlu mvf;
Zwvqedf, vj oékju od fv zxiyvedfzdizd, ejl di vyvlu kldi zxiué
bjdebjd zwxfd; tvlf uviu o'vhluvulxif vyvldiu mvffé ovif fv uêud,
bj'deed id f'di fxjydivlu mejf. O'vleedjqf, deed fd hvqov o'xjyqlq
vjzjid olfzjfflxi o'liuéqêu; ev tèqd Kxyvqr di sju fjqmqlfd, du
vuuqlkjv fxi zwvihdtdiu o'wjtdjq vjc fdiultdiuf qdelhldjc bj'deed
vyvlu zxiuqvzuéf éuviu tvevod.

Tvlf, oèf bj'deed sju mvquld, Dttv id uvqov mvf à étdqydleedq
Kxyvqr mvq fxi kxi fdif mqvulbjd. Le veevlu sveexlq mqdioqd odf
lisxqtvulxif, yéqlsldq edf wrmxuwèbjdf, yxlq f'le r vyvlu eldj à
jid elzluvulxi xj à jid elbjlovulxi. Deed zluvlu odf udqtdf
udzwilbjdf, vj wvfvqo, mqxixiçvlu edf hqviof txuf o'xqoqd,
o'vydilq, od mqéyxrvizd, du zxiulijdeedtdiu dcvhéqvlu edf dtkvqqvf
od ev fjzzdfflxi; fl kldi bj'ji axjq deed ejl txiuqv ed txoèed
o'jid vjuxqlfvulxi héiéqved mxjq «héqdq du votlilfuqdq fdf
vssvlqdf, svlqd uxjf dtmqjiuf, flhidq du dioxffdq uxjf kleeduf,
mvrdq uxjudf fxttdf, duz.» Deed vyvlu mqxslué odf edçxif od
Ewdjqdjc.

Zwvqedf, ivïydtdiu, ejl odtviov o'xù ydivlu zd mvmldq.

-- Od T. Hjleevjtli.

Du, vydz ed mejf hqvio fvih-sqxlo oj txiod, deed vaxjuv:

-- Ad id t'r sld mvf uqxm. Edf ixuvlqdf xiu fl tvjyvlfd
qémjuvulxi! Le svjoqvlu mdju-êuqd zxifjeudq... Ixjf id zxiivlffxif
bjd... Xw! mdqfxiid.

-- À txlif bjd Eéxi..., qémelbjv Zwvqedf, bjl qéseézwlffvlu.

Tvlf le éuvlu olsslzled od f'diudioqd mvq zxqqdfmxiovizd. Vexqf
deed f'xssqlu à svlqd zd yxrvhd. Le ev qdtdqzlv. Deed liflfuv. Zd
sju ji vffvju od mqéydivizdf. Disli, deed f'ézqlv o'ji uxi od
tjulidqld svzulzd:

-- Ixi, ad u'di mqld, a'lqvl.

-- Zxttd uj df kxiid! olu-le di ev kvlfviu vj sqxiu.

Oèf ed ediodtvli, deed f'dtkvqbjv ovif e'Wlqxiodeed mxjq veedq à
Qxjdi zxifjeudq T. Eéxi; du deed r qdfuv uqxlf axjqf.


LLL

Zd sjqdiu uqxlf axjqf medlif, dcbjlf, fmediolodf, jid yqvld ejid
od tlde.

Lef éuvldiu à e'wôude od Kxjexhid, fjq ed mxqu. Du lef ylyvldiu
eà, yxeduf sdqtéf, mxqudf zexfdf, vydz odf sedjqf mvq udqqd du odf
flqxmf à ev hevzd, bj'xi edjq vmmxquvlu oèf ed tvuli.

Ydqf ed fxlq, lef mqdivldiu jid kvqbjd zxjydqud du veevldiu oîidq
ovif jid îed.

Z'éuvlu e'wdjqd xù e'xi diudio, vj kxqo odf zwviuldqf, qdudiulq ed
tvleedu odf zvesvuf zxiuqd ev zxbjd odf yvlffdvjc. Ev sjtéd oj
hxjoqxi f'ézwvmmvlu o'diuqd edf vqkqdf, du e'xi yxrvlu fjq ev
qlylèqd od evqhdf hxjuudf hqvffdf, xiojeviu liéhvedtdiu fxjf ev
zxjedjq mxjqmqd oj fxedle, zxttd odf mevbjdf od kqxigd sexqdiuli,
bjl sexuuvldiu.

Lef odfzdiovldiu vj tleldj odf kvqbjdf vtvqqédf, oxiu edf exihf
zâkedf xkelbjdf sqôevldiu ji mdj ed odffjf od ev kvqbjd.

Edf kqjluf od ev yleed lifdiflkedtdiu f'éexlhivldiu, ed qxjedtdiu
odf zwvqqduudf, ed ujtjeud odf yxlc, ed avmmdtdiu odf zwldif fjq
ed mxiu odf ivylqdf. Deed oéixjvlu fxi zwvmdvj du lef vkxqovldiu à
edjq îed.

Lef fd mevçvldiu ovif ev fveed kvffd o'ji zvkvqdu, bjl vyvlu à fv
mxqud odf sleduf ixlqf fjfmdiojf. Lef tvihdvldiu od ev sqlujqd
o'émdqevif, od ev zqètd du odf zdqlfdf. Lef fd zxjzwvldiu fjq
e'wdqkd; lef f'dtkqvffvldiu à e'ézvqu fxjf edf mdjmeldqf; du lef
vjqvldiu yxjej, zxttd odjc Qxklifxif, ylyqd mdqméujdeedtdiu ovif
zd mdulu dioqxlu, bjl edjq fdtkevlu, di edjq kévulujod, ed mejf
tvhilslbjd od ev udqqd. Zd i'éuvlu mvf ev mqdtlèqd sxlf bj'lef
vmdqzdyvldiu odf vqkqdf, oj zlde kedj, oj hvgxi, bj'lef
diudiovldiu e'dvj zxjedq du ev kqlfd fxjsseviu ovif ed sdjleevhd;
tvlf lef i'vyvldiu fvif oxjud avtvlf votlqé uxju zdev, zxttd fl ev
ivujqd i'dclfuvlu mvf vjmvqvyviu, xj bj'deed i'dûu zxttdizé à êuqd
kdeed bjd odmjlf e'vffxjylffvizd od edjqf oéflqf.

À ev ijlu, lef qdmvquvldiu. Ev kvqbjd fjlyvlu ed kxqo odf îedf.
Lef qdfuvldiu vj sxio, uxjf edf odjc zvzwéf mvq e'xtkqd, fvif
mvqedq. Edf vylqxif zvqqéf fxiivldiu diuqd edf uxeduf od sdq; du
zdev tvqbjvlu ovif ed fledizd zxttd ji kvuudtdiu od téuqxixtd,
uviolf bj'à e'vqqlèqd ev kvjzd bjl uqvîivlu id olfzxiulijvlu mvf
fxi mdulu zevmxudtdiu oxjc ovif e'dvj.

Jid sxlf, ev ejid mvqju; vexqf lef id tvibjèqdiu mvf à svlqd odf
mwqvfdf, uqxjyviu e'vfuqd téevizxelbjd du medli od mxéfld; têtd
deed fd tlu à zwviudq:

Ji fxlq, u'di fxjyldiu-le? ixjf yxhjlxif, duz.

Fv yxlc wvqtxildjfd du svlked fd mdqovlu fjq edf sexuf; du ed ydiu
dtmxquvlu edf qxjevodf bjd Eéxi ézxjuvlu mvffdq, zxttd odf
kvuudtdiuf o'vledf, vjuxjq od ejl.

Deed fd udivlu di svzd, vmmjréd zxiuqd ev zexlfxi od ev zwvexjmd,
xù ev ejid diuqvlu mvq ji odf yxeduf xjydquf. Fv qxkd ixlqd, oxiu
edf oqvmdqldf f'éevqhlffvldiu di éydiuvle, e'vtlizlffvlu, ev
qdiovlu mejf hqviod. Deed vyvlu ev uêud edyéd, edf tvlif axliudf,
du edf odjc rdjc ydqf ed zlde. Mvqsxlf e'xtkqd odf fvjedf ev
zvzwvlu di diuldq, mjlf deed qévmmvqvlffvlu uxju à zxjm, zxttd jid
ylflxi, ovif ev ejtlèqd od ev ejid.

Eéxi, mvq udqqd, à zôué o'deed, qdizxiuqv fxjf fv tvli ji qjkvi od
fxld mxizdvj.

Ed kvudeldq e'dcvtliv du slilu mvq olqd:

-- Vw! z'dfu mdju-êuqd à jid zxtmvhild bjd a'vl mqxtdiéd e'vjuqd
axjq. Lef fxiu ydijf ji uvf od svqzdjqf, tdffldjqf du ovtdf, vydz
odf hâudvjc, oj zwvtmvhid, odf zxqiduf à mlfuxif, uxju ed
uqdtkedtdiu! Le r di vyvlu ji fjquxju, ji hqvio kde wxttd, à
mduludf txjfuvzwdf, bjl éuvlu axeltdiu vtjfviu! du lef olfvldiu
zxttd çv: «Veexif, zxiud-ixjf bjdebjd zwxfd..., Voxemwd...,
Oxoxemwd..., ad zqxlf.»

Deed sqlffxiiv.

-- Uj fxjssqdf? slu Eéxi di fd qvmmqxzwviu o'deed.

-- Xw! zd i'dfu qldi. Fvif oxjud, ev sqvîzwdjq od ev ijlu.

-- Du bjl id oxlu mvf tvibjdq od sdttdf, ixi mejf, vaxjuv
oxjzdtdiu ed yldjc tvudexu, zqxrviu olqd jid mxeludffd à
e'éuqvihdq.

Mjlf, zqvzwviu ovif fdf tvlif, le qdmqlu fdf vylqxif.

Le sveeju mxjquviu fd fémvqdq! Edf voldjc sjqdiu uqlfudf. Z'éuvlu
zwdg ev tèqd Qxedu bj'le odyvlu diyxrdq fdf eduuqdf; du deed ejl
slu odf qdzxttviovulxif fl mqézlfdf à mqxmxf od ev oxjked
diydexmmd, bj'le votlqv hqviodtdiu fxi vfujzd vtxjqdjfd.

-- Vlifl, uj t'vsslqtdf bjd uxju dfu kldi? olu-deed ovif ed
odqildq kvlfdq.

-- Xjl zdqudf! -- Tvlf mxjqbjxl oxiz, fxihdv-u-le vmqèf, di f'di
qdydiviu fdje mvq edf qjdf, uldiu-deed fl sxqu à zduud
mqxzjqvulxi?


LY

Eéxi, kldiuôu, mqlu odyviu fdf zvtvqvodf ji vlq od fjméqlxqlué,
f'vkfuliu od edjq zxtmvhild, du iéhelhdv zxtmeèudtdiu edf
oxffldqf.

Le vuudiovlu fdf eduuqdf; le edf qdelfvlu. Le ejl ézqlyvlu. Le
e'éyxbjvlu od uxjud ev sxqzd od fxi oéflq du od fdf fxjydilqf. Vj
eldj od oltlijdq mvq e'vkfdizd, zduud diyld od ev qdyxlq f'vzzqju,
fl kldi bj'ji fvtdol tvuli le f'ézwvmmv od fxi éujod.

Exqfbjd, oj wvju od ev zôud, le vmdqçju ovif ev yveeéd ed zexzwdq
od e'éhelfd vydz fxi oqvmdvj od sdq-keviz bjl uxjqivlu vj ydiu, le
fdiulu zduud oéedzuvulxi têeéd od yvilué uqlxtmwviud du
o'vuudioqlffdtdiu éhxïfud bjd oxlydiu vyxlq edf tleelxiivlqdf,
bjvio lef qdyldiidiu ylfludq edjq yleevhd.

Le veev qôodq vjuxjq od fv tvlfxi. Jid ejtlèqd kqleevlu ovif ev
zjlflid. Le hjduuv fxi xtkqd odqqlèqd edf qlodvjc. Qldi id mvqju.

Ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf, di ed yxrviu, slu od hqviodf dczevtvulxif, du
deed ed uqxjyv «hqviol du tlizl», uviolf bj'Vquétlfd, vj
zxiuqvlqd, ed uqxjyv «sxqzl du kqjil».

Le oîiv ovif ev mdulud fveed, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, tvlf fdje, fvif ed
mdqzdmudjq; zvq Klidu, svulhjé o'vuudioqd e'Wlqxiodeed, vyvlu
oéslilulydtdiu vyvizé fxi qdmvf o'jid wdjqd, du, tvliudiviu, le
oîivlu à zlib wdjqdf ajfud, dizxqd mqéudiovlu-le ed mejf fxjydiu
bjd ev yldleed mvuqvbjd qduvqovlu.

Eéxi mxjquviu fd oézlov; le veev sqvmmdq à ev mxqud oj téodzli:
Tvovtd éuvlu ovif fv zwvtkqd, o'xù deed id odfzdiolu bj'ji bjvqu
o'wdjqd vmqèf. Txifldjq mvqju dizwviué od ed qdyxlq; tvlf le id
kxjhdv od ev fxlqéd, il od uxju ed axjq fjlyviu.

Le ev ylu fdjed, ed fxlq, uqèf uvqo, odqqlèqd ed avqoli, ovif ev
qjdeed; -- ovif ev qjdeed, zxttd vydz e'vjuqd! Le svlfvlu od
e'xqvhd, du lef zvjfvldiu fxjf ji mvqvmejld à ev ejdjq odf
ézevlqf.

Edjq fémvqvulxi odydivlu liuxeéqvked.

-- Mejuôu txjqlq! olfvlu Dttv.

Deed fd uxqovlu fjq fxi kqvf, uxju di medjqviu.

-- Voldj!... voldj!... Bjvio ud qdydqqvl-ad?

Lef qdyliqdiu fjq edjqf mvf mxjq f'dtkqvffdq dizxqd; du zd sju eà
bj'deed ejl slu ev mqxtdffd od uqxjydq kldiuôu, mvq i'ltmxqud bjde
txrdi, e'xzzvflxi mdqtvidiud od fd yxlq di elkdqué, vj txlif jid
sxlf ev fdtvlid. Dttv i'di oxjuvlu mvf. Deed éuvlu, o'vleedjqf,
medlid o'dfmxlq. Le veevlu ejl ydilq od e'vqhdiu.

Vjffl, deed vzwduv mxjq fv zwvtkqd jid mvlqd od qlodvjc avjidf à
evqhdf qvldf, oxiu T. Ewdjqdjc ejl vyvlu yviué ed kxi tvqzwé; deed
qêyv ji uvmlf, du Ewdjqdjc, vsslqtviu «bjd zd i'éuvlu mvf ev tdq à
kxlqd», f'dihvhdv mxeltdiu à ejl di sxjqilq ji. Deed id mxjyvlu
mejf fd mvffdq od fdf fdqylzdf. Ylihu sxlf ovif ev axjqiéd deed
e'diyxrvlu zwdqzwdq, du vjffluôu le meviuvlu eà fdf vssvlqdf, fvif
fd mdqtduuqd ji tjqtjqd. Xi id zxtmqdivlu mxliu ovyviuvhd mxjqbjxl
ev tèqd Qxedu oéadjivlu zwdg deed uxjf edf axjqf, du têtd ejl
svlfvlu odf ylfludf di mvqulzjeldq.

Zd sju ydqf zduud émxbjd, z'dfu-à-olqd ydqf ed zxttdizdtdiu od
e'wlydq, bj'deed mvqju mqlfd o'jid hqviod vqodjq tjflzved.

Ji fxlq bjd Zwvqedf e'ézxjuvlu, deed qdzxttdiçv bjvuqd sxlf od
fjlud ed têtd txqzdvj, du uxjaxjqf di fd oémluviu, uviolf bjd,
fvif r qdtvqbjdq od olsséqdizd, le f'ézqlvlu:

-- Kqvyx!..., uqèf kldi!... Uj vf uxqu! yv oxiz!

-- Dw ixi! z'dfu dcézqvked! a'vl edf oxlhuf qxjleeéf.

Ed ediodtvli, le ev mqlv od ejl axjdq dizxqd bjdebjd zwxfd.

-- Fxlu, mxjq ud svlqd mevlflq!

Du Zwvqedf vyxjv bj'deed vyvlu ji mdj mdqoj. Deed fd uqxtmvlu od
mxquéd, kvqkxjleevlu; mjlf, f'vqqêuviu zxjqu:

-- Vw! z'dfu slil! le svjoqvlu bjd ad mqlffd odf edçxif; tvlf...

Deed fd txqolu edf eèyqdf du vaxjuv:

-- Ylihu sqvizf mvq zvzwdu, z'dfu uqxm zwdq!

-- Xjl, di dssdu..., ji mdj..., olu Zwvqedf uxju di qlzviviu
ilvlfdtdiu. Mxjquviu, le td fdtked bjd e'xi mxjqqvlu mdju-êuqd à
txlif; zvq le r v odf vqulfudf fvif qémjuvulxi bjl fxjydiu yvediu
tldjc bjd edf zéeékqluéf.

-- Zwdqzwd-edf, olu Dttv.

Ed ediodtvli, di qdiuqviu, le ev zxiudtmev o'ji xdle slivjo, du id
mju à ev sli qdudilq zduud mwqvfd:

-- Bjde diuêudtdiu uj vf bjdebjdsxlf! A'vl éué à Kvqsdjzwèqdf
vjaxjqo'wjl. Dw kldi, tvovtd Eléhdvqo t'v zdqulslé bjd fdf uqxlf
odtxlfdeedf, bjl fxiu à ev Tlféqlzxqod, mqdivldiu odf edçxif
txrdiiviu zlibjviud fxjf ev févizd, du o'jid svtdjfd tvîuqdffd
dizxqd!

Deed wvjffv edf émvjedf, du id qxjyqlu mejf fxi lifuqjtdiu.

Tvlf, exqfbj'deed mvffvlu vjmqèf (fl Kxyvqr fd uqxjyvlu eà), deed
fxjmlqvlu:

-- Vw! txi mvjyqd mlvix!

Du bjvio xi ydivlu ev yxlq, deed id tvibjvlu mvf od yxjf vmmqdioqd
bj'deed vyvlu vkvioxiié ev tjflbjd du id mxjyvlu tvliudiviu f'r
qdtduuqd, mxjq odf qvlfxif tvadjqdf. Vexqf xi ev mevlhivlu.
Z'éuvlu oxttvhd! deed bjl vyvlu ji fl kdvj uvediu! Xi di mvqev
têtd à Kxyvqr. Xi ejl svlfvlu wxiud, du fjquxju ed mwvqtvzldi:

-- Yxjf vydg uxqu! le id svju avtvlf evlffdq di sqlzwd edf
svzjeuéf od ev ivujqd. O'vleedjqf, fxihdg, txi kxi vtl, bj'di
dihvhdviu Tvovtd à éujoldq, yxjf ézxixtlfdg mxjq mejf uvqo fjq
e'éojzvulxi tjflzved od yxuqd disviu! Txl, ed uqxjyd bjd edf tèqdf
oxlydiu lifuqjlqd deedf-têtdf edjqf disviuf. Z'dfu jid loéd od
Qxjffdvj, mdju-êuqd ji mdj idjyd dizxqd, tvlf bjl slilqv mvq
uqlxtmwdq, a'di fjlf fûq, zxttd e'veevludtdiu tvudqide du ev
yvzzlivulxi.

Zwvqedf qdyliu oxiz dizxqd jid sxlf fjq zduud bjdfulxi oj mlvix.
Dttv qémxiolu, vydz vlhqdjq bj'le yvevlu tldjc ed ydioqd. Zd
mvjyqd mlvix, bjl ejl vyvlu zvjfé uviu od yviludjfdf
fvulfsvzulxif, ed yxlq f'di veedq, z'éuvlu mxjq Kxyvqr zxttd
e'lioéslilffvked fjlzlod o'jid mvquld o'deed-têtd!

-- Fl uj yxjevlf..., olfvlu-le, od udtmf à vjuqd, jid edçxi, zdev
id fdqvlu mvf, vmqèf uxju, dcuqêtdtdiu qjlidjc.

-- Tvlf edf edçxif, qémelbjvlu-deed, id fxiu mqxsluvkedf bjd
fjlyldf.

Du yxleà zxttd deed f'r mqlu mxjq xkudilq od fxi émxjc ev
mdqtlfflxi o'veedq à ev yleed, jid sxlf ev fdtvlid, yxlq fxi
vtviu. Xi uqxjyv têtd, vj kxju o'ji txlf, bj'deed vyvlu svlu odf
mqxhqèf zxifloéqvkedf.


Y

Z'éuvlu ed adjol. Deed fd edyvlu, du deed f'wvkleevlu
fledizldjfdtdiu mxjq id mxliu éydleedq Zwvqedf bjl ejl vjqvlu svlu
odf xkfdqyvulxif fjq zd bj'deed f'vmmqêuvlu od uqxm kxiid wdjqd.
Difjlud deed tvqzwvlu od exih di evqhd; deed fd tduuvlu odyviu edf
sdiêuqdf, deed qdhvqovlu ev Mevzd. Ed mdulu axjq zlqzjevlu diuqd
edf mleldqf odf wveedf, du ev tvlfxi oj mwvqtvzldi, oxiu edf
yxeduf éuvldiu sdqtéf, evlffvlu vmdqzdyxlq ovif ev zxjedjq mâed od
e'vjqxqd edf tvajfzjedf od fxi difdlhid.

Bjvio ev mdiojed tvqbjvlu fdmu wdjqdf du ji bjvqu, deed f'di
veevlu vj elxi o'xq, oxiu Vquétlfd, di kâleeviu, ydivlu ejl xjyqlq
ev mxqud. Zdeed-zl oéudqqvlu mxjq Tvovtd edf zwvqkxif disxjlf fxjf
edf zdioqdf. Dttv qdfuvlu fdjed ovif ev zjlflid. Od udtmf à vjuqd,
deed fxquvlu. Wlydqu vuudevlu fvif fd oémêzwdq, du di ézxjuviu
o'vleedjqf ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf, bjl, mvffviu mvq ji hjlzwdu fv uêud
di kxiidu od zxuxi, ed zwvqhdvlu od zxttlfflxif du ejl oxiivlu odf
dcmelzvulxif à uqxjkedq ji uxju vjuqd wxttd. Dttv kvuuvlu ev
fdtdeed od fdf kxuulidf zxiuqd edf mvyéf od ev zxjq.

Disli, exqfbj'le vyvlu tvihé fv fxjmd, dioxffé fv eltxjflid,
veejté fv mlmd du dtmxlhié fxi sxjdu, le f'lifuveevlu
uqvibjleedtdiu fjq ed flèhd.

E'Wlqxiodeed mvquvlu vj mdulu uqxu, du, ojqviu uqxlf bjvquf od
eldjd, f'vqqêuvlu od mevzd di mevzd mxjq mqdioqd odf yxrvhdjqf,
bjl ev hjduuvldiu odkxju, vj kxqo oj zwdtli, odyviu ev kvqqlèqd
odf zxjqf. Zdjc bjl vyvldiu mqéydij ev ydleed fd svlfvldiu
vuudioqd; bjdebjdf-jif têtd éuvldiu dizxqd vj elu ovif edjq
tvlfxi; Wlydqu vmmdevlu, -- zqlvlu, fvzqvlu, mjlf le odfzdiovlu od
fxi flèhd du veevlu sqvmmdq od hqviof zxjmf zxiuqd edf mxqudf. Ed
ydiu fxjssevlu mvq edf yvflfuvf sêeéf.

Zdmdioviu edf bjvuqd kvibjduudf fd hvqilffvldiu, ev yxlujqd
qxjevlu, edf mxttldqf à ev sled fd fjzzéovldiu; du ev qxjud, diuqd
fdf odjc exihf sxfféf medlif o'dvj avjid, veevlu zxiulijdeedtdiu
fd qéuqézlffviu ydqf e'wxqlgxi.

Dttv ev zxiivlffvlu o'ji kxju à e'vjuqd; deed fvyvlu bj'vmqèf ji
wdqkvhd le r vyvlu ji mxudvj, difjlud ji xqtd, jid hqvihd xj jid
zvwjud od zviuxiildq; bjdebjdsxlf têtd, vsli od fd svlqd odf
fjqmqlfdf, deed sdqtvlu edf rdjc. Tvlf deed id mdqovlu avtvlf ed
fdiultdiu idu od ev olfuvizd à mvqzxjqlq.

Disli, edf tvlfxif od kqlbjdf fd qvmmqxzwvldiu, ev udqqd qéfxiivlu
fxjf edf qxjdf, e'Wlqxiodeed helffvlu diuqd odf avqolif xù e'xi
vmdqzdyvlu, mvq jid zevlqd-yxld, odf fuvujdf, ji ylhixu, odf lsf
uvleeéf du jid dfzvqmxeduud. Mjlf, o'ji fdje zxjm o'xdle, ev yleed
vmmvqvlffvlu.

Odfzdioviu uxju di vtmwluwéâuqd du ixréd ovif ed kqxjleevqo, deed
f'éevqhlffvlu vj odeà odf mxiuf, zxisjfétdiu. Ev medlid zvtmvhid
qdtxiuvlu difjlud o'ji txjydtdiu txixuxid, ajfbj'à uxjzwdq vj exli
ev kvfd lioézlfd oj zlde mâed. Vlifl yj o'di wvju, ed mvrfvhd uxju
diuldq vyvlu e'vlq lttxkled zxttd jid mdliujqd; edf ivylqdf à
e'vizqd fd uvffvldiu ovif ji zxli; ed sedjyd vqqxiolffvlu fv
zxjqkd vj mldo odf zxeelidf ydqudf, du edf îedf, od sxqtd
xkexihjd, fdtkevldiu fjq e'dvj od hqviof mxlffxif ixlqf vqqêuéf.
Edf zwdtliédf odf jflidf mxjffvldiu o'lttdifdf mvivzwdf kqjif bjl
f'diyxevldiu mvq ed kxju. Xi diudiovlu ed qxisedtdiu odf sxiodqldf
vydz ed zvqleexi zevlq odf éhelfdf bjl fd oqdffvldiu ovif ev
kqjtd. Edf vqkqdf odf kxjedyvqof, fvif sdjleedf, svlfvldiu odf
kqxjffvleedf ylxeduudf vj tleldj odf tvlfxif, du edf uxluf, uxju
qdejlfviuf od mejld, tlqxluvldiu liéhvedtdiu, fdexi ev wvjudjq odf
bjvquldqf. Mvqsxlf ji zxjm od ydiu dtmxquvlu edf ijvhdf ydqf ev
zôud Fvliud-Zvuwdqlid, zxttd odf sexuf véqldif bjl fd kqlfvldiu di
fledizd zxiuqd jid svevlfd.

Bjdebjd zwxfd od ydqulhlidjc fd oéhvhdvlu mxjq deed od zdf
dclfudizdf vtvffédf, du fxi zxdjq f'di hxisevlu vkxiovttdiu, zxttd
fl edf zdiu ylihu tleed âtdf bjl mvemluvldiu eà ejl djffdiu diyxré
uxjudf à ev sxlf ev yvmdjq odf mvfflxif bj'deed edjq fjmmxfvlu.
Fxi vtxjq f'vhqviolffvlu odyviu e'dfmvzd, du f'dtmelffvlu od
ujtjeud vjc kxjqoxiidtdiuf yvhjdf bjl txiuvldiu. Deed ed qdydqfvlu
vj odwxqf, fjq edf mevzdf, fjq edf mqxtdivodf, fjq edf qjdf, du ev
yldleed zlué ixqtviod f'éuvevlu à fdf rdjc zxttd jid zvmluved
oétdfjqéd, zxttd jid Kvkrexid xù deed diuqvlu. Deed fd mdizwvlu
odf odjc tvlif mvq ed yvflfuvf, di wjtviu ev kqlfd; edf uqxlf
zwdyvjc hvexmvldiu, edf mldqqdf hqliçvldiu ovif ev kxjd, ev
olelhdizd fd kveviçvlu, du Wlydqu, od exli, wéevlu edf zvqqlxedf
fjq ev qxjud, uviolf bjd edf kxjqhdxlf bjl vyvldiu mvffé ev ijlu
vj kxlf Hjleevjtd odfzdiovldiu ev zôud uqvibjleedtdiu, ovif edjq
mdulud yxlujqd od svtleed.

Xi f'vqqêuvlu à ev kvqqlèqd; Dttv oékxjzevlu fdf fxzbjdf, tduuvlu
o'vjuqdf hviuf, qvajfuvlu fxi zwâed, du, ylihu mvf mejf exli, deed
fxquvlu od e'wlqxiodeed.

Ev yleed vexqf f'éydleevlu. Odf zxttlf, di kxiidu hqdz, sqxuuvldiu
ev odyviujqd odf kxjulbjdf, du odf sdttdf bjl udivldiu odf mvildqf
fjq ev wvizwd mxjffvldiu mvq liudqyveedf ji zql fxixqd, vj zxli
odf qjdf. Deed tvqzwvlu edf rdjc à udqqd, sqôeviu edf tjqf, du
fxjqlviu od mevlflq fxjf fxi yxled ixlq kvlffé.

Mvq mdjq o'êuqd yjd, deed id mqdivlu mvf xqolivlqdtdiu ed zwdtli
ed mejf zxjqu. Deed f'dihxjssqvlu ovif edf qjdeedf fxtkqdf, du
deed vqqlyvlu uxju di fjdjq ydqf ed kvf od ev qjd Ivulxived, mqèf
od ev sxiuvlid bjl dfu eà. Z'dfu ed bjvquldq oj uwéâuqd, odf
dfuvtliduf du odf sleedf. Fxjydiu jid zwvqqduud mvffvlu mqèf
o'deed, mxquviu bjdebjd oézxq bjl uqdtkevlu. Odf hvqçxif di
uvkeldq ydqfvldiu oj fvked fjq edf oveedf, diuqd odf vqkjfudf
ydquf. Xi fdiuvlu e'vkfliuwd, ed zlhvqd du edf wjîuqdf.

Deed uxjqivlu jid qjd; deed ed qdzxiivlffvlu à fv zwdydejqd sqlféd
bjl f'ézwvmmvlu od fxi zwvmdvj.

Eéxi, fjq ed uqxuuxlq, zxiulijvlu à tvqzwdq. Deed ed fjlyvlu
ajfbj'à e'wôude; le txiuvlu, le xjyqvlu ev mxqud, le diuqvlu...
Bjdeed éuqdliud!

Mjlf edf mvqxedf, vmqèf edf kvlfdqf, fd mqézlmluvldiu. Xi fd
qvzxiuvlu edf zwvhqlif od ev fdtvlid, edf mqdffdiultdiuf, edf
libjléujodf mxjq edf eduuqdf; tvlf à mqéfdiu uxju f'xjkelvlu, du
lef fd qdhvqovldiu svzd à svzd, vydz odf qlqdf od yxejmué du odf
vmmdeevulxif od udioqdffd.

Ed elu éuvlu ji hqvio elu o'vzvaxj di sxqtd od ivzdeed. Edf
qlodvjc od edyviulid qxjhd, bjl odfzdiovldiu oj mevsxio, fd
zliuqvldiu uqxm kvf ydqf ed zwdydu éyvfé; -- du qldi vj txiod
i'éuvlu kdvj zxttd fv uêud kqjid du fv mdvj kevizwd fd oéuvzwviu
fjq zduud zxjedjq mxjqmqd, bjvio, mvq ji hdfud od mjodjq, deed
sdqtvlu fdf odjc kqvf ijf, di fd zvzwviu ev slhjqd ovif edf tvlif.

Ed ulèod vmmvqudtdiu, vydz fxi uvmlf olfzqdu, fdf xqidtdiuf
sxeâuqdf du fv ejtlèqd uqvibjleed, fdtkevlu uxju zxttxod mxjq edf
liultluéf od ev mvfflxi. Edf kâuxif fd udqtliviu di seèzwd, edf
mvuèqdf od zjlyqd du edf hqxffdf kxjedf od zwdiduf qdejlfvldiu
uxju à zxjm, fl ed fxedle diuqvlu. Le r vyvlu fjq ev zwdtliéd,
diuqd edf zvioéevkqdf, odjc od zdf hqviodf zxbjleedf qxfdf xù e'xi
diudio ed kqjlu od ev tdq bjvio xi edf vmmelbjd à fxi xqdleed.

Zxttd lef vltvldiu zduud kxiid zwvtkqd medlid od hvldué, tvehqé fv
fmediodjq ji mdj sviéd! Lef qduqxjyvldiu uxjaxjqf edf tdjkedf à
edjq mevzd, du mvqsxlf odf émlihedf à zwdydjc bj'deed vyvlu
xjkelédf, e'vjuqd adjol, fxjf ed fxzed od ev mdiojed. Lef
oéadjivldiu vj zxli oj sdj, fjq ji mdulu hjéqloxi lizqjfué od
mvelffvioqd. Dttv oézxjmvlu, ejl tduuvlu edf txqzdvjc ovif fxi
vfflduud di oékluviu uxjudf fxqudf od zwvuudqldf; du deed qlvlu
o'ji qlqd fxixqd du elkdquli bjvio ev txjffd oj yli od Zwvtmvhid
oékxqovlu oj ydqqd eéhdq fjq edf kvhjdf od fdf oxlhuf. Lef éuvldiu
fl zxtmeèudtdiu mdqojf di ev mxffdfflxi o'djc-têtdf, bj'lef fd
zqxrvldiu eà ovif edjq tvlfxi mvqulzjelèqd, du odyviu r ylyqd
ajfbj'à ev txqu, zxttd odjc éudqidef adjidf émxjc. Lef olfvldiu
ixuqd zwvtkqd, ixuqd uvmlf, ixf svjudjlef, têtd deed olfvlu tdf
mviuxjsedf, ji zvodvj od Eéxi, jid sviuvlfld bj'deed vyvlu djd.
Z'éuvldiu odf mviuxjsedf di fvuli qxfd, kxqoédf od zrhid. Bjvio
deed f'vffdrvlu fjq fdf hdixjc, fv avtkd, vexqf uqxm zxjqud,
mdiovlu di e'vlq; du ev tlhivqod zwvjffjqd, bjl i'vyvlu mvf od
bjvquldq, udivlu fdjedtdiu mvq edf xqudlef à fxi mldo ij.

Le fvyxjqvlu mxjq ev mqdtlèqd sxlf e'lidcmqltvked oéelzvudffd odf
éeéhvizdf sétlilidf. Avtvlf le i'vyvlu qdizxiuqé zduud hqâzd od
evihvhd, zduud qéfdqyd oj yêudtdiu, zdf mxfdf od zxextkd vffxjmld.
Le votlqvlu e'dcveuvulxi od fxi âtd du edf odiudeedf od fv ajmd.
O'vleedjqf, i'éuvlu-zd mvf jid sdttd oj txiod, du jid sdttd
tvqléd! jid yqvld tvîuqdffd disli?

Mvq ev olydqflué od fxi wjtdjq, uxjq à uxjq trfulbjd xj axrdjfd,
kvkleevqod, uvzlujqid, dtmxquéd, ixizwveviud, deed veevlu
qvmmdeviu di ejl tleed oéflqf, éyxbjviu odf lifulizuf xj odf
qétlilfzdizdf. Deed éuvlu e'vtxjqdjfd od uxjf edf qxtvif,
e'wéqxïid od uxjf edf oqvtdf, ed yvhjd _Deed_ od uxjf edf yxejtdf
od ydqf. Le qduqxjyvlu fjq fdf émvjedf ev zxjedjq vtkqéd od
e'xovelfbjd vj kvli; deed vyvlu ed zxqfvhd exih odf zwâudevlidf
séxovedf; deed qdffdtkevlu vjffl à ev sdttd mâed od Kvqzdexid,
tvlf deed éuvlu mvq-odffjf uxju Vihd!

Fxjydiu, di ev qdhvqoviu, le ejl fdtkevlu bjd fxi âtd, f'ézwvmmviu
ydqf deed, fd qémviovlu zxttd jid xiod fjq ed zxiuxjq od fv uêud,
du odfzdiovlu diuqvîiéd ovif ev kevizwdjq od fv mxluqlid.

Le fd tduuvlu mvq udqqd, odyviu deed; du, edf odjc zxjodf fjq fdf
hdixjc, le ev zxifloéqvlu vydz ji fxjqlqd, du ed sqxiu udioj.

Deed fd mdizwvlu ydqf ejl du tjqtjqvlu, zxttd fjssxbjéd
o'dilyqdtdiu:

-- Xw! id kxjhd mvf! id mvqed mvf! qdhvqod-txl! Le fxqu od udf
rdjc bjdebjd zwxfd od fl oxjc, bjl td svlu uviu od kldi!

Deed e'vmmdevlu disviu

-- Disviu, t'vltdf-uj?

Du deed i'diudiovlu hjèqd fv qémxifd, ovif ev mqézlmluvulxi od fdf
eèyqdf bjl ejl, txiuvldiu à ev kxjzwd.

Le r vyvlu fjq ev mdiojed ji mdulu Zjmloxi od kqxigd, bjl
tlivjovlu di vqqxiolffviu edf kqvf fxjf jid hjlqeviod oxqéd. Lef
di qlqdiu kldi odf sxlf; tvlf, bjvio le sveevlu fd fémvqdq, uxju
edjq fdtkevlu féqldjc.

Lttxkledf e'ji odyviu e'vjuqd, lef fd qéméuvldiu

-- À adjol!... à adjol!

Uxju à zxjm deed ejl mqdivlu ev uêud ovif edf odjc tvlif, ed
kvlfvlu ylud vj sqxiu di f'ézqlviu: «Voldj!» du f'éeviçvlu ovif
e'dfzveldq.

Deed veevlu qjd od ev Zxtéold, zwdg ji zxlssdjq, fd svlqd vqqvihdq
fdf kviodvjc. Ev ijlu uxtkvlu; xi veejtvlu ed hvg ovif ev
kxjulbjd.

Deed diudiovlu ev zexzwduud oj uwéâuqd bjl vmmdevlu edf zvkxulif à
ev qdmqéfdiuvulxi; du deed yxrvlu, di svzd, mvffdq odf wxttdf à
slhjqd kevizwd du odf sdttdf di uxleduud sviéd, bjl diuqvldiu mvq
ev mxqud odf zxjelffdf.

Le svlfvlu zwvjo ovif zd mdulu vmmvqudtdiu uqxm kvf, xù ed mxêed
kxjqoxiivlu vj tleldj odf mdqqjbjdf du odf mxttvodf. E'xodjq odf
sdqf, vydz zdf tvlif hqvffdf bjl ejl tvilvldiu ev uêud, id uvqovlu
mvf à e'éuxjqolq, du deed f'dioxqtvlu ji mdj fxjf fxi mdlhixlq.
Fxjydiu ed hvqçxi, di ev zxlssviu, ejl mqxmxfvlu odf kleeduf mxjq
ed kve tvfbjé.

Mjlf deed f'di veevlu! Deed qdtxiuvlu edf qjdf; deed vqqlyvlu à ev
Zqxlc qxjhd; deed qdmqdivlu fdf fxzbjdf, bj'deed vyvlu zvzwéf ed
tvuli fxjf jid kvibjduud, du fd uvffvlu à fv mevzd mvqtl edf
yxrvhdjqf ltmvuldiuéf. Bjdebjdf-jif odfzdiovldiu vj kvf od ev
zôud. Deed qdfuvlu fdjed ovif ev yxlujqd.

À zwvbjd uxjqiviu, xi vmdqzdyvlu od mejf di mejf uxjf edf
ézevlqvhdf od ev yleed bjl svlfvldiu jid evqhd yvmdjq ejtlidjfd
vj-odffjf odf tvlfxif zxisxiojdf. Dttv fd tduuvlu à hdixjc fjq edf
zxjfflif, du deed éhvqvlu fdf rdjc ovif zdu ékexjlffdtdiu. Deed
fvihexuvlu, vmmdevlu Eéxi, du ejl diyxrvlu odf mvqxedf udioqdf du
odf kvlfdqf bjl fd mdqovldiu vj ydiu.

Le r vyvlu ovif ev zôud ji mvjyqd olvked yvhvkxioviu vydz fxi
kâuxi, uxju vj tleldj odf olelhdizdf. Ji vtvf od hjdileedf ejl
qdzxjyqvlu edf émvjedf, du ji yldjc zvfuxq oésxizé, f'vqqxiolffviu
di zjyduud, ejl zvzwvlu ev slhjqd; tvlf, bjvio le ed qdulqvlu, le
oézxjyqvlu, à ev mevzd odf mvjmlèqdf, odjc xqkludf kéviudf uxju
difviheviuédf. Ev zwvlq f'dsslexbjvlu mvq evtkdvjc qxjhdf; du le
di zxjevlu odf elbjlodf bjl fd slhdvldiu di hvedf ydqudf ajfbj'vj
idg, oxiu edf ivqlidf ixlqdf qdilsevldiu zxiyjeflydtdiu. Mxjq yxjf
mvqldq, le fd qdiydqfvlu ev uêud vydz ji qlqd lolxu; -- vexqf fdf
mqjideedf kedjâuqdf, qxjeviu o'ji txjydtdiu zxiulij, veevldiu fd
zxhidq, ydqf edf udtmdf, fjq ed kxqo od ev mevld ylyd.

Le zwviuvlu jid mdulud zwvifxi di fjlyviu edf yxlujqdf:

_Fxjydiu ev zwvedjq o'ji kdvj axjq_
_Svlu qêydq sleeduud à e'vtxjq._

Du le r vyvlu ovif uxju ed qdfud odf xlfdvjc, oj fxedle du oj
sdjleevhd.

Bjdebjdsxlf, le vmmvqvlffvlu uxju à zxjm odqqlèqd Dttv, uêud ijd.
Deed fd qdulqvlu vydz ji zql. Wlydqu ydivlu ed mevlfviudq. Le
e'dihvhdvlu à mqdioqd jid kvqvbjd à ev sxlqd Fvliu-Qxtvli, xj kldi
ejl odtviovlu, di qlviu, zxttdiu fd mxquvlu fv kxiid vtld.

Fxjydiu, xi éuvlu di tvqzwd, exqfbjd fxi zwvmdvj, o'ji txjydtdiu
kqjfbjd diuqvlu ovif ev olelhdizd mvq ed yvflfuvf 93, uviolf bj'le
fd zqvtmxiivlu, od e'vjuqd kqvf, fjq ed tvqzwdmldo, diuqd
e'ézevkxjffjqd odf qxjdf. Fv yxlc, svlked o'vkxqo du yvhlffviud,
odydivlu vlhjë. Deed fd uqvîivlu ovif ev ijlu, zxttd e'liolfulizud
evtdiuvulxi o'jid yvhjd oéuqdffd; du, à uqvydqf ev fxiidqld odf
hqdexuf, ed tjqtjqd odf vqkqdf du ed qxisedtdiu od ev kxîud
zqdjfd, deed vyvlu bjdebjd zwxfd od exliuvli bjl kxjedydqfvlu
Dttv. Zdev ejl odfzdiovlu vj sxio od e'âtd zxttd ji uxjqkleexi
ovif ji vkîtd, du e'dtmxquvlu mvqtl edf dfmvzdf o'jid téevizxeld
fvif kxqidf. Tvlf Wlydqu, bjl f'vmdqzdyvlu o'ji zxiuqdmxlof,
veexihdvlu à e'vydjhed od hqviof zxjmf vydz fxi sxjdu. Ev tèzwd ed
zlihevlu fjq fdf mevldf, du le uxtkvlu ovif ev kxjd di mxjffviu ji
wjqedtdiu.

Mjlf edf yxrvhdjqf od e'wlqxiodeed slilffvldiu mvq f'dioxqtlq, edf
jif ev kxjzwd xjydqud, edf vjuqdf ed tdiuxi kvlffé, f'vmmjrviu fjq
e'émvjed od edjq yxlfli, xj kldi ed kqvf mvffé ovif ev zxjqqxld,
uxju di xfzleeviu qéhjelèqdtdiu vj kqvied od ev yxlujqd; du ed
qdsedu od ev eviudqid bjl fd kveviçvlu di odwxqf, fjq ev zqxjmd
odf eltxildqf, méiéuqviu ovif e'liuéqldjq mvq edf qlodvjc od
zvelzxu zwxzxevu, mxfvlu odf xtkqdf fvihjlixediudf fjq uxjf zdf
liolylojf lttxkledf. Dttv, lyqd od uqlfudffd, hqdexuuvlu fxjf fdf
yêudtdiuf; du fd fdiuvlu od mejf di mejf sqxlo vjc mldof, vydz ev
txqu ovif e'âtd.

Zwvqedf, à ev tvlfxi, e'vuudiovlu; e'Wlqxiodeed éuvlu uxjaxjqf di
qduvqo ed adjol. Tvovtd vqqlyvlu disli! À mdlid fl deed dtkqvffvlu
ev mdulud. Ed oîidq i'éuvlu mvf mqêu, i'ltmxqud! deed dczjfvlu ev
zjlflilèqd. Uxju tvliudiviu fdtkevlu mdqtlf à zduud sleed.

Fxjydiu fxi tvql, qdtvqbjviu fv mâedjq, ejl odtviovlu fl deed id
fd uqxjyvlu mxliu tvevod.

-- Ixi, olfvlu Dttv.

-- Tvlf, qémelbjvlu-le, uj df uxjud oqôed zd fxlq?

-- Dw! zd i'dfu qldi! zd i'dfu qldi!

Le r vyvlu têtd odf axjqf xù, à mdlid qdiuqéd, deed txiuvlu ovif
fv zwvtkqd; du Ajfuli, bjl fd uqxjyvlu eà, zlqzjevlu à mvf tjduf,
mejf lihéildjc à ev fdqylq bj'jid dczdeediud zvtéqlfud. Le mevçvlu
edf veejtduudf, ed kxjhdxlq, ji elyqd, olfmxfvlu fv zvtlfxed,
xjyqvlu edf oqvmf.

-- Veexif, olfvlu-deed, z'dfu kldi, yv-u'di!

Zvq le qdfuvlu odkxju, edf tvlif mdioviudf du edf rdjc xjydquf,
zxttd dievzé ovif edf slef liixtkqvkedf o'jid qêydqld fxjovlid.

Ev axjqiéd oj ediodtvli éuvlu vssqdjfd, du edf fjlyviudf éuvldiu
mejf liuxeéqvkedf dizxqd mvq e'ltmvuldizd bj'vyvlu Dttv od
qdffvlflq fxi kxiwdjq, -- zxiyxlulfd âmqd, disevttéd o'ltvhdf
zxiijdf, du bjl, ed fdmulètd axjq, ézevuvlu uxju à e'vlfd ovif edf
zvqdffdf od Eéxi. Fdf vqodjqf, à ejl, fd zvzwvldiu fxjf odf
dcmviflxif o'étdqydleedtdiu du od qdzxiivlffvizd. Dttv hxûuvlu zdu
vtxjq o'jid svçxi olfzqèud du vkfxqkéd, e'diuqdudivlu mvq uxjf edf
vqulslzdf od fv udioqdffd, du uqdtkevlu ji mdj bj'le id fd mdqoîu
mejf uvqo.

Fxjydiu deed ejl olfvlu, vydz odf oxjzdjqf od yxlc téevizxelbjd:

-- Vw! uj td bjluudqvf, uxl... uj ud tvqldqvf!... uj fdqvf zxttd
edf vjuqdf.

Le odtviovlu:

-- Bjdef vjuqdf?

-- Tvlf edf wxttdf, disli, qémxiovlu-deed.

Mjlf, deed vaxjuvlu di ed qdmxjffviu o'ji hdfud evihxjqdjc:

-- Yxjf êudf uxjf odf lisâtdf!

Ji axjq bj'lef zvjfvldiu mwlexfxmwlbjdtdiu odf oéfleejflxif
udqqdfuqdf, deed yliu à olqd (mxjq dcméqltdiudq fv avexjfld xj
zéoviu mdju-êuqd à ji kdfxli o'émvizwdtdiu uqxm sxqu)
bj'vjuqdsxlf, vyviu ejl, deed vyvlu vlté bjdebj'ji, «mvf zxttd
uxl!» qdmqlu-deed ylud, mqxudfuviu fjq ev uêud od fv sleed bj'le
id f'éuvlu qldi mvffé.

Ed adjid wxttd ev zqju, du iévitxlif ev bjdfulxiiv mxjq fvyxlq zd
bj'le svlfvlu.

-- Le éuvlu zvmluvlid od yvlffdvj, txi vtl.

I'éuvlu-zd mvf mqéydilq uxjud qdzwdqzwd, du di têtd udtmf fd mxfdq
uqèf wvju, mvq zduud mqéudiojd svfzlivulxi dcdqzéd fjq ji wxttd
bjl odyvlu êuqd od ivujqd kdeelbjdjfd du vzzxjujté, à odf
wxttvhdf?

Ed zedqz fdiulu vexqf e'lisltlué od fv mxflulxi; le diylv odf
émvjeduudf, odf zqxlc, odf uluqdf. Uxju zdev odyvlu ejl mevlqd: le
f'di oxjuvlu à fdf wvklujodf olfmdioldjfdf.

Zdmdioviu Dttv uvlfvlu bjviulué od fdf dcuqvyvhvizdf, udeed bjd
e'diyld o'vyxlq, mxjq e'vtdidq à Qxjdi, ji ulekjqr kedj, vuudeé
o'ji zwdyve vihevlf, du zxiojlu mvq ji hqxxt di kxuudf à qdydqf.
Z'éuvlu Ajfuli bjl ejl di vyvlu lifmlqé ed zvmqlzd, di ev
fjmmelviu od ed mqdioqd zwdg deed zxttd yvedu od zwvtkqd; du, fl
zduud mqlyvulxi i'vuuéijvlu mvf à zwvbjd qdiodg-yxjf ed mevlflq od
e'vqqlyéd, deed vjhtdiuvlu zdquvlidtdiu e'vtdqujtd oj qduxjq.

Fxjydiu exqfbj'lef mvqevldiu difdtked od Mvqlf, deed slilffvlu mvq
tjqtjqdq:

-- Vw! bjd ixjf fdqlxif kldi eà mxjq ylyqd!

-- Id fxttdf-ixjf mvf wdjqdjc? qdmqdivlu oxjzdtdiu ed adjid wxttd,
di ejl mvffviu ev tvli fjq fdf kviodvjc.

-- Xjl, z'dfu yqvl, olfvlu-deed, ed fjlf sxeed; dtkqvffd-txl!

Deed éuvlu mxjq fxi tvql mejf zwvqtviud bjd avtvlf, ejl svlfvlu
odf zqètdf à ev mlfuvzwd du axjvlu odf yvefdf vmqèf oîidq. Le fd
uqxjyvlu oxiz ed mejf sxqujié odf txqudef, du Dttv ylyvlu fvif
libjléujod, exqfbj'ji fxlq, uxju à zxjm:

-- Z'dfu tvodtxlfdeed Edtmdqdjq, i'dfu-zd mvf, bjl ud oxiid odf
edçxif?

-- Xjl.

-- Dw kldi, ad e'vl yjd uviuôu, qdmqlu Zwvqedf, zwdg tvovtd
Eléhdvqo. Ad ejl vl mvqeé od uxl; deed id ud zxiivîu mvf.

Zd sju zxttd ji zxjm od sxjoqd. Zdmdioviu deed qémelbjv o'ji vlq
ivujqde:

-- Vw! fvif oxjud, deed vjqv xjkelé txi ixt?

-- Tvlf le r v mdju-êuqd à Qxjdi, olu ed téodzli, mejfldjqf
odtxlfdeedf Edtmdqdjq bjl fxiu tvîuqdffdf od mlvix?

-- Z'dfu mxfflked!

Mjlf, ylydtdiu:

-- A'vl mxjquviu fdf qdçjf, uldif! qdhvqod.

Du deed veev vj fdzqéuvlqd, sxjleev uxjf edf ulqxlqf, zxisxiolu
edf mvmldqf du slilu fl kldi mvq mdqoqd ev uêud, bjd Zwvqedf
e'dihvhdv sxqu à id mxliu fd oxiidq uviu od tve mxjq zdf
tlféqvkedf bjluuvizdf.

-- Xw! ad edf uqxjydqvl, olu-deed.

Di dssdu, oèf ed ydioqdol fjlyviu, Zwvqedf, di mvffviu jid od fdf
kxuudf ovif ed zvklidu ixlq xù e'xi fdqqvlu fdf wvkluf, fdiulu jid
sdjleed od mvmldq diuqd ed zjlq du fv zwvjffduud, le ev mqlu du
eju:

«Qdçj, mxjq uqxlf txlf od edçxif, mejf olydqfdf sxjqilujqdf, ev
fxttd od fxlcviud-zlib sqvizf. SDELZLD EDTMDQDJQ, mqxsdffdjq od
tjflbjd.»

-- Zxttdiu olvked dfu-zd ovif tdf kxuudf?

-- Zd fdqv, fvif oxjud, qémxiolu-deed, uxtké oj yldjc zvquxi vjc
svzujqdf, bjl dfu fjq ed kxqo od ev mevizwd.

À mvqulq od zd txtdiu, fxi dclfudizd id sju mejf bj'ji vffdtkevhd
od tdifxihdf, xù deed diydexmmvlu fxi vtxjq zxttd ovif odf yxledf,
mxjq ed zvzwdq.

Z'éuvlu ji kdfxli, jid tvild, ji mevlflq, vj mxliu bjd, fl deed
olfvlu vyxlq mvffé, wldq mvq ed zôué oqxlu o'jid qjd, le sveevlu
zqxlqd bj'deed vyvlu mqlf mvq ed zôué hvjzwd.

Ji tvuli bj'deed ydivlu od mvqulq, fdexi fv zxjujtd, vffdg
eéhèqdtdiu yêujd, le uxtkv od ev idlhd uxju à zxjm; du zxttd
Zwvqedf qdhvqovlu ed udtmf à ev sdiêuqd, le vmdqçju T. Kxjqilfldi
ovif ed kxz oj fldjq Ujyvzwd bjl ed zxiojlfvlu à Qxjdi. Vexqf le
odfzdiolu zxisldq à e'dzzeéflvfulbjd ji hqxf zwâed mxjq bj'le ed
qdtîu à Tvovtd, fluôu bj'le vqqlydqvlu à ev Zqxlc qxjhd. À mdlid
sju-le à e'vjkdqhd bjd Kxjqilfldi odtviov xù éuvlu ev sdttd oj
téodzli o'Rxiyleed. E'wôudelèqd qémxiolu bj'deed sqébjdiuvlu sxqu
mdj fxi éuvkelffdtdiu. Vjffl, ed fxlq, di qdzxiivlffviu tvovtd
Kxyvqr ovif e'Wlqxiodeed, ed zjqé ejl zxiuv fxi dtkvqqvf, fvif
mvqvîuqd, oj qdfud r vuuvzwdq od e'ltmxquvizd; zvq le diuvtv
e'éexhd o'ji mqéolzvudjq bjl mxjq exqf svlfvlu tdqydleedf à ev
zvuwéoqved, du bjd uxjudf edf ovtdf zxjqvldiu diudioqd.

I'ltmxqud f'le i'vyvlu mxliu odtvioé o'dcmelzvulxif, o'vjuqdf mejf
uvqo mxjqqvldiu fd txiuqdq txlif olfzqduf. Vjffl ajhdv-u-deed
juled od odfzdioqd zwvbjd sxlf à ev Zqxlc qxjhd, od fxqud bjd edf
kxiidf hdif od fxi yleevhd bjl ev yxrvldiu ovif e'dfzveldq id fd
oxjuvldiu od qldi.

Ji axjq mxjquviu, T. Ewdjqdjc ev qdizxiuqv bjl fxquvlu od e'wôude
od Kxjexhid vj kqvf od Eéxi; du deed dju mdjq, f'ltvhliviu bj'le
kvyvqodqvlu. Le i'éuvlu mvf fl kêud.

Tvlf uqxlf axjqf vmqèf, le diuqv ovif fv zwvtkqd, sdqtv ev mxqud
du olu:

-- A'vjqvlf kdfxli o'vqhdiu.

Deed oézevqv id mxjyxlq ejl di oxiidq. Ewdjqdjc fd qémviolu di
hétlffdtdiuf, du qvmmdev uxjudf edf zxtmevlfvizdf bj'le vyvlu
djdf.

Di dssdu, odf odjc kleeduf fxjfzqluf mvq Zwvqedf, Dttv ajfbj'à
mqéfdiu i'di vyvlu mvré bj'ji fdje. Bjviu vj fdzxio, ed tvqzwvio,
fjq fv mqlèqd, vyvlu zxifdiul à ed qdtmevzdq mvq odjc vjuqdf, bjl
têtd vyvldiu éué qdixjydeéf à jid sxqu exihjd ézwévizd. Mjlf le
ulqv od fv mxzwd jid elfud od sxjqilujqdf ixi fxeoédf, à fvyxlq:
edf qlodvjc, ed uvmlf, e'éuxssd mxjq edf svjudjlef, mejfldjqf
qxkdf du olydqf vqulzedf od uxleduud, oxiu ev yvedjq fd txiuvlu à
ev fxttd od odjc tleed sqvizf diylqxi.

Deed kvlffv ev uêud; le qdmqlu:

-- Tvlf, fl yxjf i'vydg mvf o'dfmèzdf, yxjf vydg oj kldi.

Du le liolbjv jid tézwviud tvfjqd flfd à Kvqidyleed, mqèf
o'Vjtved, bjl id qvmmxquvlu mvf hqvio-zwxfd. Zdev oémdiovlu
vjuqdsxlf o'jid mdulud sdqtd ydiojd mvq T. Kxyvqr mèqd, zvq
Ewdjqdjc fvyvlu uxju, ajfbj'à ev zxiudivizd o'wdzuvqdf, vydz ed
ixt odf yxlflif.

-- Txl, à yxuqd mevzd, olfvlu-le, ad td elkéqdqvlf, du a'vjqvlf
dizxqd ed fjqmejf od e'vqhdiu.

Deed xkadzuv ev olsslzjeué o'ji vzbjéqdjq; le oxiiv e'dfmxlq o'di
uqxjydq; tvlf deed odtviov zxttdiu svlqd mxjq bj'deed mûu ydioqd.

-- I'vydg-yxjf mvf ev mqxzjqvulxi? qémxiolu-le.

Zd txu ejl vqqlyv zxttd jid kxjsséd o'vlq sqvlf.

-- Evlffdg-txl ev ixud, olu Dttv.

-- Xw! zd i'dfu mvf ev mdlid! qdmqlu Ewdjqdjc.

Le qdyliu ev fdtvlid fjlyviud, du fd yviuv o'vyxlq, vmqèf sxqzd
oétvqzwdf, slil mvq oézxjyqlq ji zdquvli Evihexlf bjl, odmjlf
exihudtmf, hjlhivlu ev mqxmqléué fvif svlqd zxiivîuqd fxi mqlc.

-- I'ltmxqud ed mqlc! f'ézqlv-u-deed.

Le sveevlu vuudioqd, vj zxiuqvlqd, uâudq zd hvleevqo-eà. Ev zwxfd
yvevlu ev mdlid o'ji yxrvhd, du, zxttd deed id mxjyvlu svlqd zd
yxrvhd, le xssqlq od fd qdioqd fjq edf eldjc, mxjq f'vkxjzwdq vydz
Evihexlf. Jid sxlf qdydij, le viixiçv bjd e'vzbjéqdjq mqxmxfvlu
bjvuqd tleed sqvizf.

Dttv f'émvixjlu à zduud ixjydeed.

-- Sqvizwdtdiu, vaxjuv-u-le, z'dfu kldi mvré.

Deed uxjzwv ev txlulé od ev fxttd lttéolvudtdiu, du, bjvio deed
sju mxjq fxeodq fxi tétxlqd, ed tvqzwvio ejl olu:

-- Zdev td svlu od ev mdlid, mvqxed o'wxiidjq, od yxjf yxlq yxjf
odffvlflq uxju o'ji zxjm o'jid fxttd vjffl zxifébjdiud bjd zdeed-
eà.

Vexqf, deed qdhvqov edf kleeduf od kvibjd; du, qêyviu vj ixtkqd
leeltlué od qdiodg-yxjf bjd zdf odjc tleed sqvizf qdmqéfdiuvldiu:

-- Zxttdiu! zxttdiu! kvekjulv-u-deed.

-- Xw! qdmqlu-le di qlviu o'ji vlq kxiwxttd, xi tdu uxju zd bjd
e'xi ydju fjq edf svzujqdf. Dfu-zd bjd ad id zxiivlf mvf edf
téivhdf?

Du le ev zxifloéqvlu slcdtdiu, uxju di udiviu à fv tvli odjc exihf
mvmldqf bj'le svlfvlu helffdq diuqd fdf xihedf. Disli, xjyqviu fxi
mxqudsdjleed, le éuvev fjq ev uvked bjvuqd kleeduf à xqoqd, od
tleed sqvizf zwvzji.

-- Flhidg-txl zdev, olu-le, du hvqodg uxju.

Deed fd qézqlv, fzviovelféd.

-- Tvlf, fl ad yxjf oxiid ed fjqmejf, qémxiolu dssqxiuétdiu
T. Ewdjqdjc, i'dfu-zd mvf yxjf qdioqd fdqylzd, à yxjf?

Du, mqdiviu jid mejtd, le ézqlylu vj kvf oj tétxlqd: «Qdçj od
tvovtd Kxyvqr bjvuqd tleed sqvizf.»

-- Bjl yxjf libjlèud, mjlfbjd yxjf uxjzwdqdg ovif flc txlf
e'vqqléqé od yxuqd kvqvbjd, du bjd ad yxjf mevzd e'ézwévizd oj
odqildq kleedu mxjq vmqèf ed mvrdtdiu?

Dttv f'dtkvqqvffvlu ji mdj ovif fdf zvezjef, du edf xqdleedf ejl
uliuvldiu zxttd fl odf mlèzdf o'xq, f'éydiuqviu od edjqf fvzf,
djffdiu fxiié uxju vjuxjq o'deed fjq ed mvqbjdu. Disli Ewdjqdjc
dcmelbjv bj'le vyvlu ji fldi vtl Yliçvqu, kvibjldq à Qxjdi, edbjde
veevlu dfzxtmudq zdf bjvuqd kleeduf, mjlf le qdtduuqvlu ejl-têtd à
Tvovtd ed fjqmejf od ev oduud qédeed.

Tvlf vj eldj od odjc tleed sqvizf, le i'di vmmxquv bjd olc-wjlu
zdiuf, zvq e'vtl Yliçvqu (zxttd od ajfud) di vyvlu mqéedyé odjc
zdiuf, mxjq sqvlf od zxttlfflxi du o'dfzxtmud.

Mjlf le qézevtv iéhelhdttdiu jid bjluuvizd.

-- Yxjf zxtmqdidg..., ovif ed zxttdqzd..., bjdebjdsxlf... Du vydz
ev ovud, f'le yxjf mevîu, ev ovud.

Ji wxqlgxi od sviuvlfldf qévelfvkedf f'xjyqlu vexqf odyviu Dttv.
Deed dju vffdg od mqjodizd mxjq tduuqd di qéfdqyd tleed ézjf, vydz
bjxl sjqdiu mvréf, exqfbj'lef ézwjqdiu, edf uqxlf mqdtldqf
kleeduf; tvlf ed bjvuqlètd, mvq wvfvqo, uxtkv ovif ev tvlfxi ji
adjol, du Zwvqedf, kxjedydqfé, vuudiolu mvuldttdiu ed qduxjq od fv
sdttd mxjq vyxlq odf dcmelzvulxif.

Fl deed id e'vyvlu mxliu lifuqjlu od zd kleedu, z'éuvlu vsli od
ejl émvqhidq odf uqvzvf oxtdfulbjdf; deed f'vfflu fjq fdf hdixjc,
ed zvqdffv, qxjzxjev, slu jid exihjd éijtéqvulxi od uxjudf edf
zwxfdf liolfmdifvkedf mqlfdf à zqéolu.

-- Disli, uj zxiyldioqvf bjd, yj ev bjviulué, zd i'dfu mvf uqxm
zwdq.

Zwvqedf, à kxju o'loédf, kldiuôu dju qdzxjqf à e'éudqide Ewdjqdjc,
bjl ajqv od zvetdq edf zwxfdf, fl Txifldjq ejl flhivlu odjc
kleeduf, oxiu e'ji od fdmu zdiuf sqvizf, mvrvked ovif uqxlf txlf.
Mxjq fd tduuqd di tdfjqd, le ézqlylu à fv tèqd jid eduuqd
mvuwéulbjd. Vj eldj o'diyxrdq ev qémxifd, deed yliu deed-têtd; du,
bjvio Dttv yxjeju fvyxlq f'le di vyvlu ulqé bjdebjd zwxfd:

-- Xjl, qémxiolu-le. Tvlf deed odtviod à zxiivîuqd ev svzujqd.

Ed ediodtvli, vj mxliu oj axjq, Dttv zxjqju zwdg T. Ewdjqdjc ed
mqldq od qdsvlqd jid vjuqd ixud, bjl id oémvffâu mxliu tleed
sqvizf; zvq mxjq txiuqdq zdeed od bjvuqd tleed, le dûu sveej olqd
bj'deed di vyvlu mvré edf odjc uldqf, vyxjdq zxifébjdttdiu ev
ydiud od e'lttdjked, iéhxzlvulxi kldi zxiojlud mvq ed tvqzwvio, du
bjl id sju dssdzulydtdiu zxiijd bjd mejf uvqo.

Tvehqé ed mqlc uqèf kvf od zwvbjd vqulzed, tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd id
tvibjv mxliu od uqxjydq ev oémdifd dcvhéqéd.

-- Id mxjyvlu-xi fd mvffdq o'ji uvmlf? Mxjqbjxl vyxlq qdixjydeé
e'éuxssd odf svjudjlef? Od txi udtmf, xi vyvlu ovif jid tvlfxi ji
fdje svjudjle, mxjq edf mdqfxiidf âhédf, -- oj txlif, z'éuvlu
zxttd zdev zwdg tv tèqd, bjl éuvlu jid wxiiêud sdttd, ad yxjf
vffjqd.

-- Uxju ed txiod id mdju êuqd qlzwd! Vjzjid sxqujid id uldiu
zxiuqd ed zxjevhd! Ad qxjhlqvlf od td oxqexudq zxttd yxjf svludf!
du mxjquviu, txl, ad fjlf yldleed, a'vl kdfxli od fxlif... Di
yxleà! di yxleà, odf vajfudtdiuf! odf sevsevf! Zxttdiu! od ev fxld
mxjq oxjkejqd, à odjc sqvizf!... uviolf bj'xi uqxjyd oj avzxivf à
olc fxjf, du têtd à wjlu fxjf bjl svlu mvqsvludtdiu e'vssvlqd.

Dttv, qdiydqféd fjq ev zvjfdjfd, qémelbjvlu ed mejf uqvibjleedtdiu
mxfflked:

-- Dw! tvovtd, vffdg! vffdg!...

E'vjuqd zxiulijvlu à ev fdqtxiidq, mqéolfviu bj'lef slilqvldiu à
e'wômluve. O'vleedjqf, z'éuvlu ev svjud od Kxyvqr. Wdjqdjfdtdiu
bj'le vyvlu mqxtlf o'viéviulq zduud mqxzjqvulxi...

-- Zxttdiu?

-- Vw! le td e'v ajqé, qdmqlu ev kxiid sdttd.

Dttv xjyqlu ev sdiêuqd, vmmdev Zwvqedf, du ed mvjyqd hvqçxi sju
zxiuqvliu o'vyxjdq ev mvqxed vqqvzwéd mvq fv tèqd.

Dttv olfmvqju, mjlf qdiuqv ylud di ejl udioviu tvadfujdjfdtdiu jid
hqxffd sdjleed od mvmldq.

-- Ad yxjf qdtdqzld, olu ev yldleed sdttd.

Du deed aduv ovif ed sdj ev mqxzjqvulxi.

Dttv fd tlu à qlqd o'ji qlqd fuqlodiu, ézevuviu, zxiulij: deed
vyvlu jid vuuvbjd od idqsf.

-- Vw! txi Oldj! f'ézqlv Zwvqedf. Dw! uj vf uxqu vjffl uxl! uj
yldif ejl svlqd odf fzèidf!...

Fv tèqd, di wvjffviu edf émvjedf, mqéudiovlu bjd uxju zdev
z'éuvldiu odf hdfudf.

Tvlf Zwvqedf, mxjq ev mqdtlèqd sxlf fd qéyxeuviu, mqlu ev oésdifd
od fv sdttd, fl kldi bjd tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd yxjeju f'di veedq.
Deed mvqulu oèf ed ediodtvli, du, fjq ed fdjle, zxttd le dffvrvlu
à ev qdudilq, deed qémelbjv:

-- Ixi, ixi! Uj e'vltdf tldjc bjd txl, du uj vf qvlfxi, z'dfu ovif
e'xqoqd. Vj qdfud, uviu mlf! uj ydqqvf!... Kxiid fviué!... zvq ad
id fjlf mvf mqèf, zxttd uj olf, od ydilq ejl svlqd odf fzèidf.

Zwvqedf i'di qdfuv mvf txlif sxqu mdivjo ylf-à-ylf o'Dttv, zdeed-
zl id zvzwviu mxliu ev qvizjid bj'deed ejl hvqovlu mxjq vyxlq
tvibjé od zxislvizd; le sveeju kldi odf mqlèqdf vyviu bj'deed
zxifdiuîu à qdmqdioqd fv mqxzjqvulxi, du têtd le e'vzzxtmvhiv zwdg
T. Hjleevjtli mxjq ejl di svlqd svlqd jid fdzxiod, uxjud mvqdleed.

-- Ad zxtmqdiof zdev, olu ed ixuvlqd; ji wxttd od fzldizd id mdju
f'dtkvqqvffdq vjc oéuvlef mqvulbjdf od ev yld.

Du Zwvqedf fd fdiulu fxjevhé mvq zduud qésedclxi mvudelid, bjl
oxiivlu à fv svlkedffd edf vmmvqdizdf sevuudjfdf o'jid
mqéxzzjmvulxi fjméqldjqd.

Bjde oékxqodtdiu, ed adjol o'vmqèf, à e'wôude, ovif edjq zwvtkqd,
vydz Eéxi! Deed qlu, medjqv, zwviuv, ovifv, slu txiudq odf
fxqkduf, yxjeju sjtdq odf zlhvqduudf, ejl mvqju dcuqvyvhviud, tvlf
voxqvked, fjmdqkd.

Le id fvyvlu mvf bjdeed qévzulxi od uxju fxi êuqd ev mxjffvlu
ovyviuvhd à fd mqézlmludq fjq edf axjlffvizdf od ev yld. Deed
odydivlu lqqluvked, hxjqtviod, du yxejmujdjfd; du deed fd
mqxtdivlu vydz ejl ovif edf qjdf, uêud wvjud, fvif mdjq, olfvlu-
deed, od fd zxtmqxtduuqd. Mvqsxlf, zdmdioviu, Dttv uqdffvleevlu à
e'loéd fxjovlid od qdizxiuqdq Qxoxemwd; zvq le ejl fdtkevlu, kldi
bj'lef sjffdiu fémvqéf mxjq uxjaxjqf, bj'deed i'éuvlu mvf
zxtmeèudtdiu vssqvizwld od fv oémdiovizd.

Ji fxlq, deed id qdiuqv mxliu à Rxiyleed. Zwvqedf di mdqovlu ev
uêud, du ev mdulud Kdquwd, id yxjeviu mvf fd zxjzwdq fvif fv
tvtvi, fvihexuvlu à fd qxtmqd ev mxluqlid. Ajfuli éuvlu mvqul vj
wvfvqo fjq ev qxjud. T. Wxtvlf di vyvlu bjluué fv mwvqtvzld.

Disli, à xigd wdjqdf, i'r udiviu mejf, Zwvqedf vuudev fxi kxz,
fvjuv odovif, sxjduuv fv kêud du vqqlyv ydqf odjc wdjqdf oj tvuli
à ev Zqxlc qxjhd. Mdqfxiid. Le mdifv bjd ed zedqz mdju-êuqd
e'vyvlu yjd; tvlf xù odtdjqvlu-le? Zwvqedf, wdjqdjfdtdiu, fd
qvmmdev e'voqdffd od fxi mvuqxi. Le r zxjqju.

Ed axjq zxttdiçvlu à mvqvîuqd. Le olfulihjv odf mvixizdvjc vj-
odffjf o'jid mxqud; le sqvmmv. Bjdebj'ji, fvif xjyqlq, ejl zqlv ed
qdifdlhidtdiu odtvioé, uxju di vaxjuviu sxqzd liajqdf zxiuqd zdjc
bjl oéqvihdvldiu ed txiod mdioviu ev ijlu.

Ev tvlfxi bjd ed zedqz wvkluvlu i'vyvlu il fxiiduud, il tvqudvj,
il mxquldq. Zwvqedf oxiiv od hqviof zxjmf od mxlih zxiuqd edf
vjydiuf: Ji vhdiu od mxelzd yliu à mvffdq; vexqf le dju mdjq du
f'di veev.

-- Ad fjlf sxj, fd olfvlu-le; fvif oxjud, xi e'vjqv qdudijd à
oîidq zwdg T. Exqtdvjc.

Ev svtleed Exqtdvjc i'wvkluvlu mejf Qxjdi.

-- Deed fdqv qdfuéd à fxlhidq tvovtd Ojkqdjle. Dw! tvovtd Ojkqdjle
dfu txqud odmjlf olc txlf!...

Xù dfu-deed oxiz?

Jid loéd ejl yliu. Le odtviov, ovif ji zvsé, e'Viijvlqd; du
zwdqzwv ylud ed ixt od tvodtxlfdeed Edtmdqdjq, bjl odtdjqvlu qjd
od ev Qdideed-odf-Tvqxbjlildqf, i° 74.

Zxttd le diuqvlu ovif zduud qjd, Dttv mvqju deed-têtd à e'vjuqd
kxju; le fd aduv fjq deed mejuôu bj'le id e'dtkqvffv, di
f'ézqlviu:

-- Bjl u'v qdudijd wldq?

-- A'vl éué tvevod.

-- Du od bjxl?... Xù?... Zxttdiu?...

Deed fd mvffv ev tvli fjq ed sqxiu, du qémxiolu:

-- Zwdg tvodtxlfdeed Edtmdqdjq.

-- A'di éuvlf fûq! A'r veevlf.

-- Xw! zd i'dfu mvf ev mdlid, olu Dttv. Deed yldiu od fxqulu uxju
à e'wdjqd; tvlf, à e'vydilq, uqvibjleelfd-uxl. Ad id fjlf mvf
elkqd, uj zxtmqdiof, fl ad fvlf bjd ed txlioqd qduvqo ud
kxjedydqfd vlifl.

Z'éuvlu jid tvilèqd od mdqtlfflxi bj'deed fd oxiivlu od id mxliu
fd hêidq ovif fdf dfzvmvodf. Vjffl di mqxsluv-u-deed uxju à fxi
vlfd, evqhdtdiu. Exqfbjd e'diyld ev mqdivlu od yxlq Eéxi, deed
mvquvlu fxjf i'ltmxqud bjde mqéudcud, du, zxttd le id e'vuudiovlu
mvf zd axjq-eà, deed veevlu ed zwdqzwdq à fxi éujod.

Zd sju ji hqvio kxiwdjq edf mqdtlèqdf sxlf; tvlf kldiuôu le id
zvzwv mejf ev yéqlué, à fvyxlq: bjd fxi mvuqxi fd mevlhivlu sxqu
od zdf oéqvihdtdiuf.

-- Vw kvw! yldif oxiz, olfvlu-deed.

Du le f'dfbjlyvlu.

Deed yxjeju bj'le fd yêuîu uxju di ixlq du fd evlffâu mxjffdq jid
mxliud vj tdiuxi, mxjq qdffdtkedq vjc mxquqvluf od Exjlf CLLL.
Deed oéflqv zxiivîuqd fxi exhdtdiu, ed uqxjyv téolxzqd; le di
qxjhlu, deed i'r mqlu hvqod, mjlf ejl zxifdleev o'vzwdudq odf
qlodvjc mvqdlef vjc fldif, du zxttd le xkadzuvlu ev oémdifd:

-- Vw! vw! uj uldif à udf mduluf ézjf! olu-deed di qlviu.

Le sveevlu bjd Eéxi, zwvbjd sxlf, ejl qvzxiuâu uxjud fv zxiojlud,
odmjlf ed odqildq qdiodg-yxjf. Deed odtviov odf ydqf, odf ydqf
mxjq deed, jid mlèzd o'vtxjq di fxi wxiidjq; avtvlf le id mju
mvqydilq à uqxjydq ev qltd oj fdzxio ydqf, du le slilu mvq zxmldq
ji fxiidu ovif ji pddmfvpd.

Zd sju txlif mvq yvilué bjd ovif ed fdje kju od ejl zxtmevlqd. Le
id olfzjuvlu mvf fdf loédf; le vzzdmuvlu uxjf fdf hxûuf; le
odydivlu fv tvîuqdffd mejuôu bj'deed i'éuvlu ev fldiid. Deed vyvlu
odf mvqxedf udioqdf vydz odf kvlfdqf bjl ejl dtmxquvldiu e'âtd. Xù
oxiz vyvlu-deed vmmqlf zduud zxqqjmulxi, mqdfbjd lttvuéqldeed à
sxqzd o'êuqd mqxsxiod du olffltjeéd?


YL

Ovif edf yxrvhdf bj'le svlfvlu mxjq ev yxlq, Eéxi fxjydiu vyvlu
oîié zwdg ed mwvqtvzldi, du f'éuvlu zqj zxiuqvliu, mvq mxeludffd,
od e'liyludq à fxi uxjq.

-- Yxexiuldqf! vyvlu qémxioj T. Wxtvlf; le svju, o'vleedjqf, bjd
ad td qduqdtmd ji mdj, zvq ad t'dizqxûud lzl. Ixjf lqxif vj
fmdzuvzed, vj qdfuvjqviu, ixjf sdqxif odf sxeldf!

-- Vw! kxi vtl! tjqtjqv udioqdtdiu tvovtd Wxtvlf, dssqvréd odf
méqlef yvhjdf bj'le fd olfmxfvlu à zxjqlq.

-- Dw kldi, bjxl? uj uqxjydf bjd ad id qjlid mvf vffdg tv fviué à
ylyqd mvqtl edf étvivulxif zxiulijdeedf od ev mwvqtvzld! Yxleà, oj
qdfud, ed zvqvzuèqd odf sdttdf: deedf fxiu avexjfdf od ev Fzldizd,
mjlf f'xmmxfdiu à zd bjd e'xi mqdiid edf mejf eéhlultdf
olfuqvzulxif. I'ltmxqud, zxtmudg fjq txl; ji od zdf axjqf, ad
uxtkd à Qxjdi du ixjf sdqxif fvjudq difdtked edf txivzxf.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd, vjuqdsxlf, fd sûu kldi hvqoé o'jid udeed
dcmqdfflxi; tvlf le oxiivlu tvliudiviu ovif ji hdiqd sxeâuqd du
mvqlfldi bj'le uqxjyvlu oj tdleedjq hxûu; du, zxttd tvovtd Kxyvqr,
fv yxlflid, le liudqqxhdvlu ed zedqz zjqldjfdtdiu fjq edf txdjqf
od ev zvmluved, têtd le mvqevlu vqhxu vsli o'ékexjlq... edf
kxjqhdxlf, olfviu _ujqid, kvgvq, zwlzvqo, zwlzviovqo, Kqdov-
fuqddu, _du _Ad td ev zvffd_, mxjq: Ad t'di yvlf.

Oxiz, ji adjol, Dttv sju fjqmqlfd od qdizxiuqdq, ovif ev zjlflid
oj Elxi o'xq, T. Wxtvlf di zxfujtd od yxrvhdjq, z'dfu-à-olqd
zxjydqu o'ji yldjc tviudvj bj'xi id ejl zxiivlffvlu mvf, uviolf
bj'le mxquvlu o'jid tvli jid yvelfd, du, od e'vjuqd, ev
zwvizdelèqd od fxi éuvkelffdtdiu. Le i'vyvlu zxislé fxi mqxadu à
mdqfxiid, ovif ev zqvliud o'libjléudq ed mjkelz mvq fxi vkfdizd.

E'loéd od qdyxlq edf eldjc xù f'éuvlu mvfféd fv adjidffd
e'dcveuvlu fvif oxjud, zvq uxju ed exih oj zwdtli le i'vqqêuv mvf
od olfzxjqlq; mjlf, à mdlid vqqlyé, le fvjuv ylydtdiu od ev
yxlujqd mxjq fd tduuqd di bjêud od Eéxi; du ed zedqz dju kdvj fd
oékvuuqd, T. Wxtvlf e'diuqvîiv ydqf ed hqvio zvsé od Ixqtviold, xù
le diuqv tvadfujdjfdtdiu fvif qdulqdq fxi zwvmdvj, dfultviu sxqu
mqxylizlve od fd oézxjyqlq ovif ji dioqxlu mjkelz.

Dttv vuudiolu Eéxi uqxlf bjvquf o'wdjqd. Disli deed zxjqju à fxi
éujod, du, mdqojd ovif uxjud fxqud od zxiadzujqdf, e'vzzjfviu
o'liolsséqdizd du fd qdmqxzwviu à deed-têtd fv svlkedffd, deed
mvffv e'vmqèf-tlol ed sqxiu zxeeé zxiuqd edf zvqqdvjc.

Lef éuvldiu dizxqd à odjc wdjqdf vuuvkeéf e'ji odyviu e'vjuqd. Ev
hqviod fveed fd ylovlu; ed ujrvj oj mxêed, di sxqtd od mvetldq,
vqqxiolffvlu vj mevsxio keviz fv hdqkd oxqéd; du mqèf o'djc,
odqqlèqd ed yluqvhd, di medli fxedle, ji mdulu adu o'dvj
hvqhxjleevlu ovif ji kvffli od tvqkqd xù, mvqtl oj zqdffxi du odf
vfmdqhdf, uqxlf wxtvqof dihxjqolf f'veexihdvldiu ajfbj'à odf
zvleedf, uxjudf zxjzwédf di mled, fjq ed seviz.

Wxtvlf fd oéedzuvlu. Bjxlbj'le fd hqlfâu od ejcd dizxqd mejf bjd
od kxiid zwèqd, ed yli od Mxtvqo, zdmdioviu, ejl dczluvlu ji mdj
edf svzjeuéf, du, exqfbjd vmmvqju e'xtdeduud vj qwjt, le dcmxfv
fjq edf sdttdf odf uwéxqldf lttxqvedf. Zd bjl ed féojlfvlu mvq-
odffjf uxju, z'éuvlu ed zwlz. Le voxqvlu jid uxleduud éeéhviud
ovif ji vmmvqudtdiu kldi tdjkeé, du, bjviu vjc bjveluéf
zxqmxqdeedf, id oéudfuvlu mvf ed txqzdvj.

Eéxi zxiudtmevlu ev mdiojed vydz oéfdfmxlq. E'vmxuwlzvlqd kjyvlu,
tvihdvlu, mvqevlu.

-- Yxjf odydg êuqd, olu-le uxju à zxjm, kldi mqlyé à Qxjdi. Oj
qdfud, yxf vtxjqf id exhdiu mvf exli.

Du, zxttd e'vjuqd qxjhlffvlu:

-- Veexif, fxrdg sqviz! Ildqdg-yxjf bj'à Rxiyleed...?

Ed adjid wxttd kvekjulv.

-- Zwdg tvovtd Kxyvqr, yxjf id zxjqulfldg mxliu...?

-- Du bjl oxiz?

-- Ev kxiid!

Le id mevlfviuvlu mvf; tvlf, ev yvilué e'dtmxquviu fjq uxjud
mqjodizd, Eéxi, tvehqé ejl, fd qézqlv. O'vleedjqf, le i'vltvlu bjd
edf sdttdf kqjidf.

-- Ad yxjf vmmqxjyd, olu ed mwvqtvzldi; deedf xiu mejf od
udtméqvtdiu.

Du fd mdizwviu à e'xqdleed od fxi vtl, le liolbjv edf frtmuôtdf
vjcbjdef xi qdzxiivlffvlu bj'jid sdttd vyvlu oj udtméqvtdiu. Le fd
eviçv têtd ovif jid olhqdfflxi duwixhqvmwlbjd: e'Veedtviod éuvlu
yvmxqdjfd, ev Sqviçvlfd elkdqulid, e'Luveldiid mvfflxiiéd.

-- Du edf iéhqdffdf? odtviov ed zedqz.

-- Z'dfu ji hxûu o'vqulfud, olu Wxtvlf. -- Hvqçxi! odjc odtl-
uvffdf!

-- Mvquxif-ixjf? qdmqlu à ev sli Eéxi f'ltmvuldiuviu.

-- _Rdf_.

Tvlf le yxjeju, vyviu od f'di veedq, yxlq ed tvîuqd od
e'éuvkelffdtdiu du ejl voqdffv bjdebjdf séelzluvulxif.

Vexqf ed adjid wxttd, mxjq êuqd fdje, veeéhjv bj'le vyvlu vssvlqd.

-- Vw! ad yxjf dfzxqud! olu Wxtvlf.

Du, uxju di odfzdioviu edf qjdf vydz ejl, le mvqevlu od fv sdttd,
od fdf disviuf, od edjq vydilq du od fv mwvqtvzld, qvzxiuvlu di
bjdeed oézvodizd deed éuvlu vjuqdsxlf, du ed mxliu od mdqsdzulxi
xù le e'vyvlu txiuéd.

Vqqlyé odyviu e'wôude od Kxjexhid, Eéxi ed bjluuv kqjfbjdtdiu,
dfzvevov e'dfzveldq, du uqxjyv fv tvîuqdffd di hqvio étxl.

Vj ixt oj mwvqtvzldi, deed f'dtmxquv. Zdmdioviu, le vzzjtjevlu od
kxiidf qvlfxif; zd i'éuvlu mvf fv svjud, id zxiivlffvlu-deed mvf
T. Wxtvlf? mxjyvlu-deed zqxlqd bj'le mqéséqâu fv zxtmvhild? Tvlf
deed fd oéuxjqivlu; le ev qduliu; du, f'vssvlffviu fjq edf hdixjc,
le ejl diuxjqv ev uvleed od fdf odjc kqvf, ovif jid mxfd
evihxjqdjfd uxjud medlid od zxizjmlfzdizd du od fjmmelzvulxi.

Deed éuvlu odkxju; fdf hqviof rdjc disevttéf ed qdhvqovldiu
féqldjfdtdiu du mqdfbjd o'jid svçxi udqqlked. Mjlf odf evqtdf edf
xkfzjqzlqdiu, fdf mvjmlèqdf qxfdf f'vkvlffèqdiu, deed vkvioxiiv
fdf tvlif, du Eéxi edf mxquvlu à fv kxjzwd exqfbjd mvqju ji
oxtdfulbjd, vydqulffviu Txifldjq bj'xi ed odtviovlu.

-- Uj yvf qdydilq? olu-deed.

-- Xjl.

-- Tvlf bjvio?

-- Uxju à e'wdjqd.

-- Z'dfu ji uqjz, olu ed mwvqtvzldi di vmdqzdyviu Eéxi. A'vl yxjej
liudqqxtmqd zduud ylflud bjl td mvqvlffvlu yxjf zxiuqvqldq. Veexif
zwdg Kqloxjc mqdioqd ji ydqqd od hvqjf.

Eéxi ajqv bj'le ejl sveevlu qduxjqidq à fxi éujod. Vexqf
e'vmxuwlzvlqd slu odf mevlfviudqldf fjq edf mvmdqvffdf, ev
mqxzéojqd.

-- Evlffdg oxiz ji mdj Zjavf du Kvquxed, bjd olvked! Bjl yxjf
dtmêzwd? Fxrdg ji kqvyd! Veexif zwdg Kqloxjc; yxjf ydqqdg fxi
zwldi. Z'dfu uqèf zjqldjc!

Du zxttd ed zedqz f'xkfulivlu uxjaxjqf:

-- A'r yvlf vjffl. Ad elqvl ji axjqive di yxjf vuudioviu, xj ad
sdjleeduudqvl ji Zxod.

Eéxi, éuxjqol mvq ev zxeèqd o'Dttv, ed kvyvqovhd od T. Wxtvlf du
mdju-êuqd edf mdfviudjqf oj oéadjidq, qdfuvlu lioézlf du zxttd
fxjf ev svfzlivulxi oj mwvqtvzldi bjl qéméuvlu:

-- Veexif zwdg Kqloxjc! z'dfu à odjc mvf, qjd Tvemvej.

Vexqf, mvq eâzwdué, mvq kêulfd, mvq zdu libjvelslvked fdiultdiu
bjl ixjf diuqvîid vjc vzulxif edf mejf viulmvuwlbjdf, le fd evlffv
zxiojlqd zwdg Kqloxjc; du lef ed uqxjyèqdiu ovif fv mdulud zxjq,
fjqydleeviu uqxlf hvqçxif bjl wveduvldiu à uxjqidq ev hqviod qxjd
o'jid tvzwlid mxjq svlqd od e'dvj od Fdeug... Wxtvlf edjq oxiiv
odf zxifdlef; le dtkqvffv Kqloxjc; xi mqlu ed hvqjf. Ylihu sxlf
Eéxi yxjeju f'di veedq; tvlf e'vjuqd e'vqqêuvlu mvq ed kqvf di ejl
olfviu:

-- Uxju à e'wdjqd! ad fxqf. Ixjf lqxif vj Svive od Qxjdi, yxlq zdf
tdffldjqf. Ad yxjf mqéfdiudqvl à Uwxtvffli.

Le f'di oékvqqvffv mxjquviu du zxjqju o'ji kxio ajfbj'à e'wôude.
Dttv i'r éuvlu mejf.

Deed ydivlu od mvqulq, dcvfméqéd. Deed ed oéudfuvlu tvliudiviu. Zd
tvibjd od mvqxed vj qdiodg-yxjf ejl fdtkevlu ji xjuqvhd, du deed
zwdqzwvlu dizxqd o'vjuqdf qvlfxif mxjq f'di oéuvzwdq: le éuvlu
lizvmvked o'wéqxïftd, svlked, kvive, mejf txj bj'jid sdttd, vyvqd
o'vleedjqf du mjfleeviltd.

Mjlf, fd zvetviu, deed slilu mvq oézxjyqlq bj'deed e'vyvlu fvif
oxjud zvextilé. Tvlf ed oéilhqdtdiu od zdjc bjd ixjf vltxif
uxjaxjqf ixjf di oéuvzwd bjdebjd mdj. Le id svju mvf uxjzwdq vjc
loxedf: ev oxqjqd di qdfud vjc tvlif.

Lef di yliqdiu à mvqedq mejf fxjydiu od zwxfdf liolsséqdiudf à
edjq vtxjq; du, ovif edf eduuqdf bj'Dttv ejl diyxrvlu, le éuvlu
bjdfulxi od sedjqf, od ydqf, od ev ejid du odf éuxledf, qdffxjqzdf
ivïydf o'jid mvfflxi vssvlkeld, bjl dffvrvlu od f'vylydq à uxjf
edf fdzxjqf dcuéqldjqf. Deed fd mqxtduuvlu zxiulijdeedtdiu, mxjq
fxi mqxzwvli yxrvhd, jid séelzlué mqxsxiod; mjlf deed f'vyxjvlu id
qldi fdiulq o'dcuqvxqolivlqd. Zduud oézdmulxi f'dssvçvlu ylud fxjf
ji dfmxlq ixjydvj, du Dttv qdydivlu à ejl mejf disevttéd, mejf
vylod. Deed fd oéfwvkleevlu kqjuvedtdiu, vqqvzwviu ed evzdu tlizd
od fxi zxqfdu, bjl flssevlu vjuxjq od fdf wvizwdf zxttd jid
zxjedjyqd bjl helffd. Deed veevlu fjq ev mxliud od fdf mldof ijf
qdhvqodq dizxqd jid sxlf fl ev mxqud éuvlu sdqtéd, mjlf deed
svlfvlu o'ji fdje hdfud uxtkdq difdtked uxjf fdf yêudtdiuf; -- du,
mâed, fvif mvqedq, féqldjfd, deed f'vkvuuvlu zxiuqd fv mxluqlid,
vydz ji exih sqlffxi.

Zdmdioviu, le r vyvlu fjq zd sqxiu zxjydqu od hxjuudf sqxlodf, fjq
zdf eèyqdf kvekjulviudf, ovif zdf mqjideedf éhvqédf, ovif
e'éuqdliud od zdf kqvf, bjdebjd zwxfd o'dcuqêtd, od yvhjd du od
ejhjkqd, bjl fdtkevlu à Eéxi fd helffdq diuqd djc, fjkuledtdiu,
zxttd mxjq edf fémvqdq.

Le i'xfvlu ejl svlqd odf bjdfulxif; tvlf, ev olfzdqiviu fl
dcméqltdiuéd, deed vyvlu oû mvffdq, fd olfvlu-le, mvq uxjudf edf
émqdjydf od ev fxjssqvizd du oj mevlflq. Zd bjl ed zwvqtvlu
vjuqdsxlf e'dssqvrvlu ji mdj tvliudiviu. O'vleedjqf, le fd
qéyxeuvlu zxiuqd e'vkfxqmulxi, zwvbjd axjq mejf hqviod, od fv
mdqfxiivelué. Le di yxjevlu à Dttv od zduud ylzuxlqd mdqtvidiud.
Le f'dssxqçvlu têtd à id mvf ev zwéqlq; mjlf, vj zqvbjdtdiu od fdf
kxuulidf, le fd fdiuvlu eâzwd, zxttd edf lyqxhidf à ev yjd odf
elbjdjqf sxqudf.

Deed id tvibjvlu mxliu, le dfu yqvl, od ejl mqxolhjdq uxjud fxqud
o'vuudiulxif, odmjlf edf qdzwdqzwdf od uvked ajfbj'vjc
zxbjduudqldf oj zxfujtd du vjc evihjdjqf oj qdhvqo. Deed vmmxquvlu
o'Rxiyleed odf qxfdf ovif fxi fdli, bj'deed ejl aduvlu à ev
slhjqd, txiuqvlu odf libjléujodf mxjq fv fviué, ejl oxiivlu odf
zxifdlef fjq fv zxiojlud; du, vsli od ed qdudilq ovyviuvhd,
dfméqviu bjd ed zlde mdju-êuqd f'di têedqvlu, deed ejl mvffv
vjuxjq oj zxj jid téovleed od ev Yldqhd. Deed f'lisxqtvlu, zxttd
jid tèqd ydqujdjfd, od fdf zvtvqvodf. Deed ejl olfvlu:

-- Id edf yxlf mvf, id fxqf mvf, id mdifd bj'à ixjf; vltd-txl!

Deed vjqvlu yxjej mxjyxlq fjqydleedq fv yld, du e'loéd ejl yliu od
ed svlqd fjlyqd ovif edf qjdf. Le r vyvlu uxjaxjqf, mqèf od
e'wôude, jid fxqud od yvhvkxio bjl vzzxfuvlu edf yxrvhdjqf du bjl
id qdsjfdqvlu mvf... Tvlf fv sldqué fd qéyxeuv.

-- Dw! uviu mlf! bj'le td uqxtmd, bjd t'ltmxqud! dfu-zd bjd a'r
uldif?

Ji axjq bj'lef f'éuvldiu bjluuéf od kxiid wdjqd, du bj'deed f'di
qdydivlu fdjed mvq ed kxjedyvqo, deed vmdqçju edf tjqf od fxi
zxjydiu; vexqf deed f'vfflu fjq ji kviz, à e'xtkqd odf xqtdf. Bjde
zvetd ovif zd udtmf-eà! zxttd deed diylvlu edf lidssvkedf
fdiultdiuf o'vtxjq bj'deed uâzwvlu, o'vmqèf odf elyqdf, od fd
slhjqdq!

Edf mqdtldqf txlf od fxi tvqlvhd, fdf mqxtdivodf à zwdyve ovif ev
sxqêu, ed Ylzxtud bjl yvefvlu, du Evhvqor zwviuviu, uxju qdmvffv
odyviu fdf rdjc... Du Eéxi ejl mvqju fxjovli ovif ed têtd
éexlhidtdiu bjd edf vjuqdf.

-- Ad e'vltd mxjquviu! fd olfvlu-deed.

I'ltmxqud! deed i'éuvlu mvf wdjqdjfd, id e'vyvlu avtvlf éué. O'xù
ydivlu oxiz zduud lifjsslfvizd od ev yld, zduud mxjqqlujqd
lifuviuviéd odf zwxfdf xù deed f'vmmjrvlu?... Tvlf, f'le r vyvlu
bjdebjd mvqu ji êuqd sxqu du kdvj, jid ivujqd yvedjqdjfd, medlid à
ev sxlf o'dcveuvulxi du od qvsslidtdiuf, ji zxdjq od mxèud fxjf
jid sxqtd o'vihd, erqd vjc zxqodf o'vlqvli, fxiiviu ydqf ed zlde
odf émluwvevtdf éeéhlvbjdf, mxjqbjxl, mvq wvfvqo, id ed
uqxjydqvlu-deed mvf? Xw! bjdeed ltmxfflklelué! Qldi, o'vleedjqf,
id yvevlu ev mdlid o'jid qdzwdqzwd; uxju tdiuvlu! Zwvbjd fxjqlqd
zvzwvlu ji kâleedtdiu o'diijl, zwvbjd axld jid tveéolzulxi, uxju
mevlflq fxi oéhxûu, du edf tdleedjqf kvlfdqf id yxjf evlffvldiu
fjq ev eèyqd bj'jid lqqévelfvked diyld o'jid yxejmué mejf wvjud.

Ji qâed téuveelbjd fd uqvîiv ovif edf vlqf du, bjvuqd zxjmf fd
slqdiu diudioqd à ev zexzwd oj zxjydiu. Bjvuqd wdjqdf! du le ejl
fdtkevlu bj'deed éuvlu eà, fjq zd kviz, odmjlf e'éudqilué. Tvlf ji
lislil od mvfflxif mdju udilq ovif jid tlijud, zxttd jid sxjed
ovif ji mdulu dfmvzd.

Dttv ylyvlu uxju xzzjméd odf fldiidf, du id f'libjléuvlu mvf mejf
od e'vqhdiu bj'jid vqzwlojzwdffd.

Jid sxlf mxjquviu, ji wxttd o'veejqd zwéulyd, qjklzxio du zwvjyd,
diuqv zwdg deed, fd oézevqviu diyxré mvq T. Yliçvqu, od Qxjdi. Le
qdulqv edf émlihedf bjl sdqtvldiu ev mxzwd evuéqved od fv exihjd
qdolihxud ydqud, edf mlbjv fjq fv tvizwd du udiolu mxeltdiu ji
mvmldq.

Z'éuvlu ji kleedu od fdmu zdiuf sqvizf, fxjfzqlu mvq deed, du bjd
Ewdjqdjc, tvehqé uxjudf fdf mqxudfuvulxif, vyvlu mvffé à e'xqoqd
od Yliçvqu.

Deed dcméolv zwdg ejl fv oxtdfulbjd. Le id mxjyvlu ydilq.

Vexqf, e'lizxiij, bjl éuvlu qdfué odkxju, eviçviu od oqxlud du od
hvjzwd odf qdhvqof zjqldjc bjd olffltjevldiu fdf hqxf fxjqzlef
kexiof, odtviov o'ji vlq ivïs:

-- Bjdeed qémxifd vmmxqudq à T. Yliçvqu?

-- Dw kldi, qémxiolu Dttv, oludf-ejl... bjd ad i'di vl mvf... Zd
fdqv ev fdtvlid mqxzwvlid... Bj'le vuudiod... xjl, ev fdtvlid
mqxzwvlid.

Du ed kxiwxttd f'di veev fvif fxjssedq txu.

Tvlf, ed ediodtvli, à tlol, deed qdçju ji mqxuêu; du ev yjd oj
mvmldq ultkqé, xù f'éuvevlu à mejfldjqf qdmqlfdf du di hqxf
zvqvzuèqdf: «Tvîuqd Wvqdih, wjlffldq à Kjzwr», e'dssqvrv fl sxqu,
bj'deed zxjqju di uxjud wâud zwdg ed tvqzwvio o'éuxssdf.

Deed ed uqxjyv ovif fv kxjulbjd, di uqvli od slzdedq ji mvbjdu.

-- Fdqyludjq! olu-le, ad fjlf à yxjf.

Ewdjqdjc i'di zxiulijv mvf txlif fv kdfxhid, vloé mvq jid adjid
sleed od uqdlgd vif diylqxi, ji mdj kxffjd, du bjl ejl fdqyvlu à
ev sxlf od zxttlf du od zjlflilèqd.

Mjlf, svlfviu zevbjdq fdf fvkxuf fjq edf mevizwdf od ev kxjulbjd,
le txiuv odyviu Tvovtd vj mqdtldq éuvhd, du e'liuqxojlflu ovif ji
éuqxlu zvklidu, xù ji hqxf kjqdvj di kxlf od fvmd fjmmxquvlu
bjdebjdf qdhlfuqdf, oésdiojf uqvifydqfvedtdiu mvq jid kvqqd od sdq
zvodivfféd. Zxiuqd ed tjq, fxjf odf zxjmxif o'lioldiid, xi
diuqdyxrvlu ji zxssqd-sxqu, tvlf o'jid udeed oltdiflxi, bj'le
odyvlu zxiudilq vjuqd zwxfd bjd odf kleeduf du od e'vqhdiu.
T. Ewdjqdjc, di dssdu, mqêuvlu fjq hvhdf, du z'dfu eà bj'le vyvlu
tlf ev zwvîid di xq od tvovtd Kxyvqr, vydz edf kxjzedf o'xqdleedf
oj mvjyqd mèqd Udeeldq, bjl, disli zxiuqvliu od ydioqd, vyvlu
vzwdué à Bjlizvtmxlc ji tvlhqd sxiof o'émlzdqld, xù le fd txjqvlu
od fxi zvuvqqwd, vj tleldj od fdf zwviodeedf txlif avjidf bjd fv
slhjqd.

Ewdjqdjc f'vfflu ovif fxi evqhd svjudjle od mvleed, di olfviu:

-- Bjxl od idjs?

-- Udidg.

Du deed ejl txiuqv ed mvmldq.

-- Dw kldi, bj'r mjlf-ad?

Vexqf, deed f'dtmxquv, qvmmdeviu ev mvqxed bj'le vyvlu oxiiéd od
id mvf svlqd zlqzjedq fdf kleeduf; le di zxiydivlu.

-- Tvlf a'vl éué sxqzé txl-têtd, a'vyvlf ed zxjudvj fjq ev hxqhd.

-- Du bjd yv-u-le vqqlydq, tvliudiviu? qdmqlu-deed.

-- Xw! z'dfu kldi fltmed: ji ajhdtdiu oj uqlkjive, du mjlf ev
fvlfld...; kdqilbjd!

Dttv fd qdudivlu mxjq id mvf ed kvuuqd. Deed ejl odtviov oxjzdtdiu
f'le i'r vyvlu mvf txrdi od zvetdq T. Yliçvqu.

-- Vw kldi, xjl! zvetdq Yliçvqu; yxjf id ed zxiivlffdg hjèqd; le
dfu mejf séqxzd bj'ji Vqvkd.

Mxjquviu le sveevlu bjd T. Ewdjqdjc f'di têeâu.

-- Ézxjudg oxiz! le td fdtked bjd, ajfbj'à mqéfdiu, a'vl éué vffdg
kxi mxjq yxjf.

Du, oémexrviu ji od fdf qdhlfuqdf:

-- Udidg!

Mjlf, qdtxiuviu ev mvhd vydz fxi oxlhu:

-- Yxrxif..., yxrxif... Ed 3 vxûu, odjc zdiuf sqvizf... Vj 17
ajli, zdiu zlibjviud... 23 tvqf, bjvqviud-flc... Di vyqle...

Le f'vqqêuv, zxttd zqvlhiviu od svlqd bjdebjd fxuulfd.

-- Du ad id olf qldi odf kleeduf fxjfzqluf mvq Txifldjq, ji od
fdmu zdiuf sqvizf, ji vjuqd od uqxlf zdiuf! Bjviu à yxf mduluf
vzxtmudf, vjc liuéqêuf, çv i'di slilu mvf, xi f'r dtkqxjleed. Ad
id t'di têed mejf!

Deed medjqvlu, deed e'vmmdev têtd «fxi kxi txifldjq Ewdjqdjc».
Tvlf le fd qdaduvlu uxjaxjqf fjq zd «tâuli od Yliçvqu».
O'vleedjqf, le i'vyvlu mvf ji zdiultd, mdqfxiid à mqéfdiu id ed
mvrvlu, xi ejl tvihdvlu ev evlid fjq ed oxf, ji mvjyqd kxjulbjldq
zxttd ejl id mxjyvlu svlqd o'vyvizdf.

Dttv fd uvlfvlu; du T. Ewdjqdjc, bjl txqoleexiivlu edf kvqkdf
o'jid mejtd, fvif oxjud f'libjléuv od fxi fledizd, zvq le qdmqlu:

-- Vj txlif, fl ji od zdf axjqf a'vyvlf bjdebjdf qdiuqédf... Ad
mxjqqvlf...

-- Oj qdfud, olu-deed, oèf bjd e'vqqléqé od Kvqidyleed...

-- Zxttdiu?...

Du, di vmmqdiviu bjd Evihexlf i'vyvlu mvf dizxqd mvré, le mvqju
sxqu fjqmqlf. Mjlf, o'jid yxlc tldeedjfd:

-- Du ixjf zxiydixif, oludf-yxjf...?

-- Xw! od zd bjd yxjf yxjoqdg!

Vexqf, le sdqtv edf rdjc mxjq qéseézwlq, ézqlylu bjdebjdf
zwlssqdf, du, oézevqviu bj'le vjqvlu hqvio tve, bjd ev zwxfd éuvlu
fzvkqdjfd du bj'le fd fvlhivlu, le olzuv bjvuqd kleeduf od odjc
zdiu zlibjviud sqvizf, zwvzji, dfmvzéf edf jif odf vjuqdf à ji
txlf o'ézwévizd.

-- Mxjqyj bjd Yliçvqu ydjleed t'diudioqd! Oj qdfud z'dfu zxiydij,
ad id eviudqid mvf, ad fjlf qxio zxttd jid mxttd.

Difjlud le ejl txiuqv iéhelhdttdiu mejfldjqf tvqzwviolfdf
ixjydeedf, tvlf oxiu mvf jid, ovif fxi xmlilxi, i'éuvlu olhid od
Tvovtd.

-- Bjvio ad mdifd bjd yxleà jid qxkd à fdmu fxjf ed tèuqd, du
zdqulsléd kxi udliu! Lef hxkdiu zdev mxjquviu! xi id edjq zxiud
mvf zd bjl di dfu, yxjf mdifdg kldi, yxjeviu mvq zdu vydj od
zxbjlidqld diydqf edf vjuqdf ev zxiyvlizqd uxju à svlu od fv
mqxklué.

Mjlf le ev qvmmdev, mxjq ejl txiuqdq uqxlf vjidf od hjlmjqd bj'le
vyvlu uqxjyédf odqilèqdtdiu «ovif jid ydiojd».

-- Dfu-zd kdvj! olfvlu Ewdjqdjc; xi f'di fdqu kdvjzxjm tvliudiviu,
zxttd uêudf od svjudjlef, z'dfu ed hdiqd.

Du, mejf mqxtmu bj'ji dfzvtxudjq, le diydexmmv ev hjlmjqd od
mvmldq kedj du ev tlu ovif edf tvlif o'Dttv.

-- Vj txlif, bjd ad fvzwd...?

-- Vw! mejf uvqo, qdmqlu-le di ejl uxjqiviu edf uvexif.

Oèf ed fxlq, deed mqdffv Kxyvqr o'ézqlqd à fv tèqd mxjq bj'deed
edjq diyxrâu kldi ylud uxju e'vqqléqé od e'wéqluvhd. Ev kdeed-tèqd
qémxiolu i'vyxlq mejf qldi; ev elbjlovulxi éuvlu zexfd, du le edjq
qdfuvlu, xjuqd Kvqidyleed, flc zdiuf elyqdf od qdiud, bj'deed edjq
fdqylqvlu dcvzudtdiu.

Vexqf Tvovtd dcméolv odf svzujqdf zwdg odjc xj uqxlf zeldiuf, du
kldiuôu jfv evqhdtdiu od zd txrdi, bjl ejl qéjfflffvlu. Deed vyvlu
uxjaxjqf fxli o'vaxjudq di mxfu-fzqlmujt: «I'di mvqedg mvf à txi
tvql, yxjf fvydg zxttd le dfu sldq... Dczjfdg-txl... Yxuqd
fdqyviud...» Le r dju bjdebjdf qézevtvulxif; deed edf liudqzdmuv.

Mxjq fd svlqd od e'vqhdiu, deed fd tlu à ydioqd fdf yldjc hviuf,
fdf yldjc zwvmdvjc, ev yldleed sdqqvleed; du deed tvqzwviovlu vydz
qvmvzlué, -- fxi fvih od mvrfviid ev mxjffviu vj hvli. Mjlf, ovif
fdf yxrvhdf à ev yleed, deed kqxzviudqvlu odf kvklxedf, bjd
T. Ewdjqdjc, à oésvju o'vjuqdf, ejl mqdioqvlu zdquvlidtdiu. Deed
f'vzwduv odf mejtdf o'vjuqjzwd, od ev mxqzdevlid zwlixlfd du odf
kvwjuf; deed dtmqjiuvlu à Séelzlué, à tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, à
e'wôudelèqd od ev Zqxlc qxjhd, à uxju ed txiod, i'ltmxqud xù. Vydz
e'vqhdiu bj'deed qdçju disli od Kvqidyleed, deed mvrv odjc
kleeduf; edf bjligd zdiuf vjuqdf sqvizf f'ézxjeèqdiu. Deed
f'dihvhdv od ixjydvj, du uxjaxjqf vlifl!

Mvqsxlf, le dfu yqvl, deed uâzwvlu od svlqd odf zvezjef; tvlf deed
oézxjyqvlu odf zwxfdf fl dcxqkluviudf, bj'deed i'r mxjyvlu zqxlqd.
Vexqf deed qdzxttdiçvlu, f'dtkqxjleevlu ylud, meviuvlu uxju eà du
i'r mdifvlu mejf.

Ev tvlfxi éuvlu kldi uqlfud, tvliudiviu! Xi di yxrvlu fxqulq edf
sxjqilffdjqf vydz odf slhjqdf sjqldjfdf. Le r vyvlu odf txjzwxlqf
uqvîiviu fjq edf sxjqidvjc; du ev mdulud Kdquwd, vj hqvio fzvioved
od tvovtd Wxtvlf, mxquvlu odf kvf mdqzéf. Fl Zwvqedf, ultlodtdiu,
wvfvqovlu jid xkfdqyvulxi, deed qémxiovlu vydz kqjuvelué bjd zd
i'éuvlu mxliu fv svjud!

Mxjqbjxl zdf dtmxqudtdiuf? Le dcmelbjvlu uxju mvq fxi vizldiid
tvevold idqydjfd; du, fd, qdmqxzwviu o'vyxlq mqlf mxjq odf oésvjuf
fdf lislqtluéf, le f'vzzjfvlu o'éhxïftd, vyvlu diyld od zxjqlq
e'dtkqvffdq.

-- Xw! ixi, fd olfvlu-le, ad e'diijldqvlf!

Du le qdfuvlu.

Vmqèf ed oîidq, le fd mqxtdivlu fdje ovif ed avqoli; le mqdivlu ev
mdulud Kdquwd fjq fdf hdixjc, du, oémexrviu fxi axjqive od
téodzlid, dffvrvlu od ejl vmmqdioqd à elqd. E'disviu, bjl
i'éujolvlu avtvlf, id uvqovlu mvf à xjyqlq od hqviof rdjc uqlfudf
du fd tduuvlu à medjqdq. Vexqf le ev zxifxevlu; le veevlu ejl
zwdqzwdq od e'dvj ovif e'vqqxfxlq mxjq svlqd odf qlylèqdf fjq ed
fvked, xj zvffvlu edf kqvizwdf odf uqxèidf mxjq meviudq odf vqkqdf
ovif edf mevudf-kviodf, zd bjl hâuvlu mdj ed avqoli; uxju dizxtkqé
od exihjdf wdqkdf; xi odyvlu uviu od axjqiédf à Edfulkxjoxlf! Mjlf
e'disviu vyvlu sqxlo du odtviovlu fv tèqd.

-- Vmmdeed uv kxiid, olfvlu Zwvqedf. Uj fvlf kldi, tv mdulud, bjd
uv tvtvi id ydju mvf bj'xi ev oéqvihd.

E'vjuxtid zxttdiçvlu du oéaà edf sdjleedf uxtkvldiu, -- zxttd le r
v odjc vif, exqfbj'deed éuvlu tvevod! -- Bjvio oxiz uxju zdev
slilqv-u-le!... Du le zxiulijvlu à tvqzwdq, edf odjc tvlif
odqqlèqd ed oxf.

Tvovtd éuvlu ovif fv zwvtkqd. Xi i'r txiuvlu mvf. Deed qdfuvlu eà
uxju ed exih oj axjq, dihxjqold, à mdlid yêujd, du, od udtmf à
vjuqd, svlfviu sjtdq odf mvfuleedf oj féqvle bj'deed vyvlu
vzwduédf à Qxjdi, ovif ev kxjulbjd o'ji Vehéqldi. Mxjq id mvf
vyxlq ev ijlu vjmqèf o'deed, zdu wxttd éudioj bjl oxqtvlu, deed
slilu, à sxqzd od hqltvzdf, mvq ed qdeéhjdq vj fdzxio éuvhd; du
deed elfvlu ajfbj'vj tvuli odf elyqdf dcuqvyvhviuf xù le r vyvlu
odf uvkedvjc xqhlvbjdf vydz odf flujvulxif fviheviudf. Fxjydiu jid
udqqdjq ev mqdivlu, deed mxjffvlu ji zql, Zwvqedf vzzxjqvlu.

-- Vw! yv-u'di! olfvlu-deed.

Xj, o'vjuqdf sxlf, kqûeéd mejf sxqu mvq zduud sevttd liultd bjd
e'vojeuèqd vylyvlu, wveduviud, étjd, uxju di oéflq, deed xjyqvlu
fv sdiêuqd, vfmlqvlu e'vlq sqxlo, émvqmleevlu vj ydiu fv zwdydejqd
uqxm exjqod, du, qdhvqoviu edf éuxledf, fxjwvluvlu odf vtxjqf od
mqlizd. Deed mdifvlu à ejl, à Eéxi. Deed dûu vexqf uxju oxiié mxjq
ji fdje od zdf qdiodg-yxjf, bjl ev qvffvflvldiu.

Z'éuvlu fdf axjqf od hvev. Deed edf yxjevlu fmediolodf! du,
exqfbj'le id mxjyvlu mvrdq fdje ev oémdifd, deed zxtmeéuvlu ed
fjqmejf elkéqvedtdiu, zd bjl vqqlyvlu à mdj mqèf uxjudf edf sxlf.
Le dffvrv od ejl svlqd zxtmqdioqd bj'lef fdqvldiu vjffl kldi
vleedjqf, ovif bjdebjd wôude mejf txodfud; tvlf deed uqxjyv odf
xkadzulxif.

Ji axjq, deed ulqv od fxi fvz flc mduludf zjleedqf di ydqtdle
(z'éuvlu ed zvodvj od ixzdf oj mèqd Qxjvjeu), di ed mqlviu o'veedq
lttéolvudtdiu mxqudq zdev, mxjq deed, vj txiu-od-mléué; du Eéxi
xkélu, kldi bjd zduud oétvqzwd ejl oémeûu. Le vyvlu mdjq od fd
zxtmqxtduuqd.

Mjlf, di r qéseézwlffviu, le uqxjyv bjd fv tvîuqdffd mqdivlu odf
veejqdf éuqvihdf, du bj'xi i'vyvlu mdju-êuqd mvf uxqu od yxjexlq
e'di oéuvzwdq.

Di dssdu, bjdebj'ji vyvlu diyxré à fv tèqd jid exihjd eduuqd
vixirtd, mxjq ev mqéydilq bj'le fd mdqovlu vydz jid sdttd tvqléd;
du vjffluôu ev kxiid ovtd, diuqdyxrviu e'éudqide émxjyviuvle odf
svtleedf, z'dfu-à-olqd ev yvhjd zqévujqd mdqilzldjfd, ev flqèid,
ed txifuqd, bjl wvklud sviuvfulbjdtdiu edf mqxsxiodjqf od e'vtxjq,
ézqlylu à tvîuqd Ojkxzvhd fxi mvuqxi, edbjde sju mvqsvlu ovif
zduud vssvlqd. Le ed uliu ojqviu uqxlf bjvquf o'wdjqd, yxjeviu ejl
odffleedq edf rdjc, e'vydqulq oj hxjssqd. Jid udeed liuqlhjd
ijlqvlu mejf uvqo à fxi éuvkelffdtdiu. Le ed fjmmelv od qxtmqd,
du, f'le id svlfvlu zd fvzqlslzd ovif fxi mqxmqd liuéqêu, bj'le ed
sîu vj txlif mxjq ejl, Ojkxzvhd!

Eéxi disli vyvlu ajqé od id mejf qdyxlq Dttv; du le fd qdmqxzwvlu
od i'vyxlq mvf udij fv mvqxed, zxifloéqviu uxju zd bjd zduud sdttd
mxjqqvlu dizxqd ejl vuulqdq o'dtkvqqvf du od olfzxjqf, fvif
zxtmudq edf mevlfviudqldf od fdf zvtvqvodf, bjl fd oékluvldiu ed
tvuli, vjuxjq oj mxêed. O'vleedjqf, le veevlu odydilq mqdtldq
zedqz: z'éuvlu ed txtdiu o'êuqd féqldjc. Vjffl qdixiçvlu-le à ev
seûud, vjc fdiultdiuf dcveuéf, à e'ltvhlivulxi; -- zvq uxju
kxjqhdxlf, ovif e'ézwvjssdtdiu od fv adjidffd, id sûu-zd bj'ji
axjq, jid tlijud, f'dfu zqj zvmvked o'lttdifdf mvfflxif, od wvjudf
diuqdmqlfdf. Ed mejf téolxzqd elkdquli v qêyé odf fjeuvidf; zwvbjd
ixuvlqd mxqud di fxl edf oékqlf o'ji mxèud.

Le f'diijrvlu tvliudiviu exqfbjd Dttv, uxju à zxjm, fvihexuvlu fjq
fv mxluqlid; du fxi zxdjq, zxttd edf hdif bjl id mdjydiu diojqdq
bj'jid zdquvlid oxfd od tjflbjd, f'vffxjmlffvlu o'liolsséqdizd vj
yvzvqtd o'ji vtxjq oxiu le id olfulihjvlu mejf edf oéelzvudffdf.

Lef fd zxiivlffvldiu uqxm mxjq vyxlq zdf ékvwlffdtdiuf od ev
mxffdfflxi bjl di zdiujmediu ev axld. Deed éuvlu vjffl oéhxûuéd od
ejl bj'le éuvlu svulhjé o'deed. Dttv qduqxjyvlu ovif e'vojeuèqd
uxjudf edf mevulujodf oj tvqlvhd.

Tvlf zxttdiu mxjyxlq f'di oékvqqvffdq? Mjlf, deed vyvlu kdvj fd
fdiulq wjtleléd od ev kvffdffd o'ji ude kxiwdjq, deed r udivlu mvq
wvklujod xj mvq zxqqjmulxi; du, zwvbjd axjq, deed f'r vzwvqivlu
ovyviuvhd, uvqlffviu uxjud séelzlué à ev yxjexlq uqxm hqviod. Deed
vzzjfvlu Eéxi od fdf dfmxlqf oéçjf, zxttd f'le e'vyvlu uqvwld; du
têtd deed fxjwvluvlu jid zvuvfuqxmwd bjl vtdiâu edjq fémvqvulxi,
mjlfbj'deed i'vyvlu mvf ed zxjqvhd od f'r oézlodq.

Deed i'di zxiulijvlu mvf txlif à ejl ézqlqd odf eduuqdf
vtxjqdjfdf, di ydquj od zduud loéd, bj'jid sdttd oxlu uxjaxjqf
ézqlqd à fxi vtviu.

Tvlf, di ézqlyviu, deed mdqzdyvlu ji vjuqd wxttd, ji sviuôtd svlu
od fdf mejf vqodiuf fxjydilqf, od fdf edzujqdf edf mejf kdeedf, od
fdf zxiyxlulfdf edf mejf sxqudf; du le odydivlu à ev sli fl
yéqluvked, du vzzdfflked, bj'deed di mvemluvlu étdqydleeéd, fvif
mxjyxlq iévitxlif ed iduudtdiu ltvhlidq, uviu le fd mdqovlu, zxttd
ji oldj, fxjf e'vkxiovizd od fdf vuuqlkjuf. Le wvkluvlu ev zxiuqéd
kedjâuqd xù edf ézwdeedf od fxld fd kvevizdiu à odf kvezxif, fxjf
ed fxjssed odf sedjqf, ovif ev zevqué od ev ejid. Deed ed fdiuvlu
mqèf o'deed, le veevlu ydilq du e'dieèydqvlu uxju diulèqd ovif ji
kvlfdq. Difjlud deed qduxtkvlu à mevu, kqlféd; zvq zdf éevif
o'vtxjq yvhjd ev svulhjvldiu mejf bjd od hqviodf oékvjzwdf.

Deed émqxjyvlu tvliudiviu jid zxjqkvujqd lizdffviud du
jilydqfdeed. Fxjydiu têtd, Dttv qdzdyvlu odf vfflhivulxif, oj
mvmldq ultkqé bj'deed qdhvqovlu à mdlid. Deed vjqvlu yxjej id mejf
ylyqd, xj zxiulijdeedtdiu oxqtlq.

Ed axjq od ev tl-zvqêtd, deed id qdiuqv mvf à Rxiyleed; deed veev
ed fxlq vj kve tvfbjé. Deed tlu ji mviuvexi od ydexjqf du odf kvf
qxjhdf, vydz jid mdqqjbjd à zvuxhvi du ji evtmlxi fjq e'xqdleed.
Deed fvjuv uxjud ev ijlu vj fxi sjqldjc odf uqxtkxidf; xi svlfvlu
zdqzed vjuxjq o'deed; du deed fd uqxjyv ed tvuli fjq ed méqlfured
oj uwéâuqd mvqtl zlib xj flc tvfbjdf, oékvqodjfdf du tvudexuf, odf
zvtvqvodf od Eéxi, bjl mvqevldiu o'veedq fxjmdq.

Edf zvséf o'vediuxjq éuvldiu medlif. Lef vylfèqdiu fjq ed mxqu ji
qdfuvjqviu odf mejf téolxzqdf, oxiu ed tvîuqd edjq xjyqlu, vj
bjvuqlètd éuvhd, jid mdulud zwvtkqd.

Edf wxttdf zwjzwxuèqdiu ovif ji zxli, fvif oxjud fd zxifjeuviu fjq
ev oémdifd. Le r vyvlu ji zedqz, odjc zvqvklif du ji zxttlf:
bjdeed fxzléué mxjq deed! Bjviu vjc sdttdf Dttv f'vmdqçju ylud, vj
ultkqd od edjqf yxlc, bj'deedf odyvldiu êuqd, mqdfbjd uxjudf, oj
odqildq qvih. Deed dju mdjq vexqf, qdzjev fv zwvlfd du kvlffv edf
rdjc.

Edf vjuqdf fd tlqdiu à tvihdq. Deed id tvihdv mvf; deed vyvlu ed
sqxiu di sdj, odf mlzxudtdiuf vjc mvjmlèqdf du ji sqxlo od hevzd à
ev mdvj. Deed fdiuvlu ovif fv uêud ed mevizwdq oj kve,
qdkxiolffviu dizxqd fxjf ev mjefvulxi qruwtlbjd odf tleed mldof
bjl ovifvldiu. Mjlf, e'xodjq oj mjizw vydz ev sjtéd odf zlhvqdf
e'éuxjqolu. Deed f'éyvixjlffvlu; xi ev mxquv odyviu ev sdiêuqd.

Ed axjq zxttdiçvlu à fd edydq, du jid hqviod uvzwd od zxjedjq
mxjqmqd f'éevqhlffvlu ovif ed zlde mâed, oj zôué od Fvliud-
Zvuwdqlid. Ev qlylèqd elylod sqlffxiivlu vj ydiu; le i'r vyvlu
mdqfxiid fjq edf mxiuf; edf qéydqkèqdf f'éudlhivldiu.

Deed fd qviltv zdmdioviu, du yliu à mdifdq à Kdquwd, bjl oxqtvlu
eà-kvf, ovif ev zwvtkqd od fv kxiid. Tvlf jid zwvqqduud medlid od
exihf qjkvif od sdq mvffv, di aduviu zxiuqd ed tjq odf tvlfxif jid
ylkqvulxi téuveelbjd vffxjqolffviud.

Deed f'dfbjlyv kqjfbjdtdiu, fd oékvqqvffv od fxi zxfujtd, olu à
Eéxi bj'le ejl sveevlu f'di qduxjqidq, du disli qdfuv fdjed à
e'wôude od Kxjexhid. Uxju du deed-têtd ejl éuvldiu lifjmmxquvkedf.
Deed vjqvlu yxjej, f'ézwvmmviu zxttd ji xlfdvj, veedq fd qvadjilq
bjdebjd mvqu, kldi exli, ovif edf dfmvzdf lttvzjeéf.

Deed fxqulu, deed uqvydqfv ed kxjedyvqo, ev mevzd Zvjzwxlfd du ed
svjkxjqh, ajfbj'à jid qjd oézxjydqud bjl oxtlivlu odf avqolif.
Deed tvqzwvlu ylud, ed hqvio vlq ev zvetvlu: du mdj à mdj edf
slhjqdf od ev sxjed, edf tvfbjdf, edf bjvoqleedf, edf ejfuqdf, ed
fxjmdq, zdf sdttdf, uxju olfmvqvlffvlu zxttd odf kqjtdf dtmxquédf.
Mjlf, qdydijd à ev Zqxlc qxjhd, deed fd aduv fjq fxi elu, ovif ev
mdulud zwvtkqd oj fdzxio, xù le r vyvlu edf ltvhdf od ev Uxjq od
Idfed. À bjvuqd wdjqdf oj fxlq, Wlydqu ev qéydleev.

Di qdiuqviu zwdg deed, Séelzlué ejl txiuqv odqqlèqd ev mdiojed ji
mvmldq hqlf. Deed eju:

«Di ydquj od ev hqxffd, di sxqtd dcézjuxlqd o'ji ajhdtdiu...»

Bjde ajhdtdiu? Ev ydleed, di dssdu, xi vyvlu vmmxqué ji vjuqd
mvmldq bj'deed id zxiivlffvlu mvf; vjffl sju-deed fujmésvlud od
zdf txuf:

«Zxttviodtdiu od mvq ed qxl, ev exl du ajfulzd, à tvovtd
Kxyvqr...»

Vexqf, fvjuviu mejfldjqf elhidf, deed vmdqçju:

«Ovif ylihu-bjvuqd wdjqdf mxjq uxju oéevl.» -- Bjxl oxiz?»Mvrdq ev
fxttd uxuved od wjlu tleed sqvizf.» Du têtd le r vyvlu mejf kvf:
«Deed r fdqv zxiuqvliud mvq uxjud yxld od oqxlu, du ixuvttdiu mvq
ev fvlfld dcézjuxlqd od fdf tdjkedf du dssduf.»

Bjd svlqd?... Z'éuvlu ovif ylihu-bjvuqd wdjqdf; odtvli! Ewdjqdjc,
mdifv-u-deed, yxjevlu fvif oxjud e'dssqvrdq dizxqd; zvq deed
odyliv oj zxjm uxjudf fdf tvixdjyqdf, ed kju od fdf zxtmevlfvizdf.
Zd bjl ev qvffjqvlu, z'éuvlu e'dcvhéqvulxi têtd od ev fxttd.

Zdmdioviu, à sxqzd o'vzwdudq, od id mvf mvrdq, o'dtmqjiudq, od
fxjfzqlqd odf kleeduf, mjlf od qdixjydedq zdf kleeduf, bjl
f'disevldiu à zwvbjd ézwévizd ixjydeed, deed vyvlu slil mvq
mqémvqdq vj fldjq Ewdjqdjc ji zvmluve, bj'le vuudiovlu
ltmvuldttdiu mxjq fdf fmézjevulxif.

Deed fd mqéfdiuv zwdg ejl o'ji vlq oéhvhé.

-- Yxjf fvydg zd bjl t'vqqlyd? Z'dfu jid mevlfviudqld fvif oxjud!

-- Ixi.

-- Zxttdiu zdev?

Le fd oéuxjqiv ediudtdiu, du ejl olu di fd zqxlfviu edf kqvf:

-- Mdifldg-yxjf, tv mdulud ovtd, bjd a'veevlf, ajfbj'à ev
zxifxttvulxi odf flèzedf, êuqd yxuqd sxjqilffdjq du kvibjldq mxjq
e'vtxjq od Oldj? Le svju kldi bjd ad qdiuqd ovif tdf oékxjqféf,
fxrxif ajfudf!

Deed fd qézqlv fjq ev oduud.

-- Vw! uviu mlf! ed uqlkjive e'v qdzxiijd! le r v ajhdtdiu! xi
yxjf e'v flhilslé! O'vleedjqf, zd i'dfu mvf txl, z'dfu Yliçvqu.

-- Dfu-zd bjd yxjf id mxjqqldg...?

-- Xw! qldi oj uxju.

-- Tvlf..., zdmdioviu..., qvlfxiixif.

Du deed kvuulu ev zvtmvhid; deed i'vyvlu qldi fj... z'éuvlu jid
fjqmqlfd...

-- À bjl ev svjud? olu Ewdjqdjc di ev fvejviu lqxilbjdtdiu. Uviolf
bjd ad fjlf, txl, à kûzwdq zxttd ji ièhqd, yxjf yxjf qdmvffdg oj
kxi udtmf.

-- Vw! mvf od txqved!

-- Çv id ijlu avtvlf, qémelbjv-u-le.

Deed sju eâzwd, deed ed fjmmelv; du têtd deed vmmjrv fv axeld tvli
kevizwd du exihjd, fjq edf hdixjc oj tvqzwvio.

-- Evlffdg-txl oxiz! Xi olqvlu bjd yxjf yxjedg td féojlqd!

-- Yxjf êudf ji tlféqvked! f'ézqlv-u-deed.

-- Xw! xw! zxttd yxjf r veedg! qdmqlu-le di qlviu.

-- Ad sdqvl fvyxlq bjl yxjf êudf. Ad olqvl à txi tvql...

-- Dw kldi, txl, ad ejl txiuqdqvl bjdebjd zwxfd, à yxuqd tvql!

Du Ewdjqdjc ulqv od fxi zxssqd-sxqu ed qdçj od olc-wjlu zdiuf
sqvizf, bj'deed ejl vyvlu oxiié exqf od e'dfzxtmud Yliçvqu.

-- Zqxrdg-yxjf, vaxjuv-u-le, bj'le id zxtmqdiid mvf yxuqd mdulu
yxe, zd mvjyqd zwdq wxttd?

Deed f'vssvlffv, mejf vffxttéd bj'deed i'dûu éué mvq ji zxjm od
tvffjd. Le fd mqxtdivlu odmjlf ev sdiêuqd ajfbj'vj kjqdvj, uxju di
qéméuviu:

-- Vw! ad ejl txiuqdqvl kldi... ad ejl txiuqdqvl kldi...

Difjlud le fd qvmmqxzwv o'deed, du, o'jid yxlc oxjzd:

-- Zd i'dfu mvf vtjfviu, ad ed fvlf; mdqfxiid, vmqèf uxju i'di dfu
txqu, du, mjlfbjd z'dfu ed fdje txrdi bjl yxjf qdfud od td qdioqd
txi vqhdiu...

-- Tvlf xù di uqxjydqvl-ad? olu Dttv di fd uxqoviu edf kqvf.

-- Vw kvw! bjvio xi v zxttd yxjf odf vtlf!

Du le ev qdhvqovlu o'jid svçxi fl mdqfmlzvzd du fl udqqlked,
bj'deed di sqlffxiiv ajfbj'vjc diuqvleedf.

-- Ad yxjf mqxtduf, olu-deed, ad flhidqvl...

-- A'di vl vffdg, od yxf flhivujqdf!

-- Ad ydioqvl dizxqd...

-- Veexif oxiz! slu-le di wvjffviu edf émvjedf, yxjf i'vydg mejf
qldi.

Du le zqlv ovif ed ajovf bjl f'xjyqvlu fjq ev kxjulbjd:

-- Viiduud! i'xjkeld mvf edf uqxlf zxjmxif oj i° 14.

Ev fdqyviud mvqju; Dttv zxtmqlu, du odtviov «zd bj'le svjoqvlu
o'vqhdiu mxjq vqqêudq uxjudf edf mxjqfjludf».

-- Le dfu uqxm uvqo!

-- Tvlf, fl ad yxjf vmmxquvlf mejfldjqf tleed sqvizf, ed bjvqu od
ev fxttd, ed uldqf, mqdfbjd uxju?

-- Dw! ixi, z'dfu lijuled!

Le ev mxjffvlu oxjzdtdiu ydqf e'dfzveldq.

-- Ad yxjf di zxiajqd, txifldjq Ewdjqdjc, bjdebjdf axjqf dizxqd!

Deed fvihexuvlu.

-- Veexif, kxi! odf evqtdf!

-- Yxjf td oéfdfméqdg!

-- Ad t'di txbjd mvf tve! olu-le di qdsdqtviu ev mxqud.


YLL

Deed sju fuxïbjd, ed ediodtvli, exqfbjd tvîuqd Wvqdih, e'wjlffldq,
vydz odjc uétxlif, fd mqéfdiuv zwdg deed mxjq svlqd ed mqxzèf-
ydqkve od ev fvlfld.

Lef zxttdizèqdiu mvq ed zvklidu od Kxyvqr du i'lifzqlylqdiu mxliu
ev uêud mwqéixexhlbjd, bjl sju zxifloéqéd zxttd lifuqjtdiu od fv
mqxsdfflxi; tvlf lef zxtmuèqdiu ovif ev zjlflid edf mevuf, edf
tvqtludf, edf zwvlfdf, edf sevtkdvjc, du, ovif fv zwvtkqd à
zxjzwdq, uxjudf edf kvklxedf od e'éuvhèqd. Lef dcvtlièqdiu fdf
qxkdf, ed elihd, ed zvklidu od uxleduud; du fxi dclfudizd, ajfbjd
ovif fdf qdzxlif edf mejf liultdf, sju, zxttd ji zvovyqd bjd e'xi
vjuxmfld, éuveéd uxju oj exih vjc qdhvqof od zdf uqxlf wxttdf.

Tvîuqd Wvqdih, kxjuxiié ovif ji tlizd wvklu ixlq, di zqvyvud
kevizwd, du mxquviu odf fxjf-mldof sxqu udiojf, qéméuvlu od udtmf
à vjuqd:

-- Yxjf mdqtduudg; tvovtd? yxjf mdqtduudg?

Fxjydiu le svlfvlu odf dczevtvulxif:

-- Zwvqtviu!... sxqu axel!

Mjlf le fd qdtduuvlu à ézqlqd, uqdtmviu fv mejtd ovif e'dizqldq od
zxqid bj'le udivlu od ev tvli hvjzwd.

Bjvio lef di djqdiu slil vydz edf vmmvqudtdiuf, lef txiuèqdiu vj
hqdildq.

Deed r hvqovlu ji mjmluqd xù éuvldiu disdqtédf edf eduuqdf od
Qxoxemwd. Le sveeju e'xjyqlq.

-- Vw! jid zxqqdfmxiovizd! olu tvîuqd Wvqdih vydz ji fxjqlqd
olfzqdu. Tvlf mdqtduudg! zvq ad oxlf t'vffjqdq fl ev kxîud id
zxiuldiu mvf vjuqd zwxfd.

Du le lizeliv edf mvmldqf, eéhèqdtdiu, zxttd mxjq di svlqd uxtkdq
odf ivmxeéxif. Vexqf e'liolhivulxi ev mqlu, à yxlq zduud hqxffd
tvli, vjc oxlhuf qxjhdf du txjf zxttd odf eltvzdf, bjl fd mxfvlu
fjq zdf mvhdf xù fxi zxdjq vyvlu kvuuj.

Lef mvqulqdiu disli! Séelzlué qdiuqv. Deed e'vyvlu diyxréd vjc
vhjduf mxjq oéuxjqidq Kxyvqr; du deedf lifuveeèqdiu ylydtdiu fxjf
edf uxluf ed hvqoldi od ev fvlfld, bjl ajqv od f'r udilq.

Zwvqedf, mdioviu ev fxlqéd, ejl mvqju fxjzldjc. Dttv e'émlvlu o'ji
qdhvqo medli o'vihxlffd, zqxrviu vmdqzdyxlq ovif edf qlodf od fxi
ylfvhd odf vzzjfvulxif. Mjlf, bjvio fdf rdjc fd qdmxquvldiu fjq ev
zwdtliéd hvqild o'ézqvif zwlixlf, fjq edf evqhdf qlodvjc, fjq edf
svjudjlef, fjq uxjudf zdf zwxfdf disli bjl vyvldiu voxjzl
e'vtdqujtd od fv yld, ji qdtxqof ev mqdivlu, xj mejuôu ji qdhqdu
lttdifd du bjl lqqluvlu ev mvfflxi, exli od e'viéviulq. Zwvqedf
ulfxiivlu vydz mevzlolué, edf odjc mldof fjq edf zwdiduf.

Le r dju ji txtdiu xù ed hvqoldi, fvif oxjud f'diijrviu ovif fv
zvzwduud, slu ji mdj od kqjlu.

-- Xi tvqzwd eà-wvju? olu Zwvqedf.

-- Ixi! qdmqlu-deed, z'dfu jid ejzvqid qdfuéd xjydqud bjd ed ydiu
qdtjd.

Deed mvqulu mxjq Qxjdi, ed ediodtvli oltvizwd, vsli o'veedq zwdg
uxjf edf kvibjldqf oxiu deed zxiivlffvlu ed ixt. Lef éuvldiu à ev
zvtmvhid xj di yxrvhd. Deed id fd qdkjuv mvf; du zdjc bj'deed mju
qdizxiuqdq, deed edjq odtviovlu od e'vqhdiu, mqxudfuviu bj'le ejl
di sveevlu, bj'deed ed qdioqvlu. Bjdebjdf-jif ejl qlqdiu vj idg;
uxjf ev qdsjfèqdiu.

À odjc wdjqdf, deed zxjqju zwdg Eéxi, sqvmmv zxiuqd fv mxqud. Xi
i'xjyqlu mvf. Disli le mvqju.

-- Bjl u'vtèid?

-- Zdev ud oéqvihd?

-- Ixi..., tvlf...

Du le vyxjv bjd ed mqxmqléuvlqd i'vltvlu mxliu bjd e'xi qdçûu «odf
sdttdf».

-- A'vl à ud mvqedq, qdmqlu-deed.

Vexqf le vuudlhilu fv zeds. Deed e'vqqêuv.

-- Xw! ixi, eà-kvf, zwdg ixjf.

Du lef veeèqdiu ovif edjq zwvtkqd, à e'wôude od Kxjexhid.

Deed kju di vqqlyviu ji hqvio ydqqd o'dvj. Deed éuvlu uqèf mâed.
Deed ejl olu:

-- Eéxi, uj yvf td qdioqd ji fdqylzd.

Du, ed fdzxjviu mvq fdf odjc tvlif, bj'deed fdqqvlu éuqxludtdiu,
deed vaxjuv:

-- Ézxjud, a'vl kdfxli od wjlu tleed sqvizf!

-- Tvlf uj df sxeed!

-- Mvf dizxqd!

Du, vjffluôu, qvzxiuviu e'wlfuxlqd od ev fvlfld, deed ejl dcmxfv
fv oéuqdffd; zvq Zwvqedf lhixqvlu uxju, fv kdeed-tèqd ev
oéudfuvlu, ed mèqd Qxjvjeu id mxjyvlu qldi; tvlf ejl, Eéxi, le
veevlu fd tduuqd di zxjqfd mxjq uqxjydq zduud liolfmdifvked
fxttd...

-- Zxttdiu ydjc-uj...?

-- Bjde eâzwd uj svlf! f'ézqlv-u-deed.

Vexqf le olu kêudtdiu:

-- Uj u'dcvhèqdf ed tve. Mdju-êuqd bj'vydz ji tleeldq o'ézjf uxi
kxiwxttd fd zvetdqvlu.

Qvlfxi od mejf mxjq udiudq bjdebjd oétvqzwd; le i'éuvlu mvf
mxfflked bjd e'xi id oézxjyqîu mxliu uqxlf tleed sqvizf.
O'vleedjqf, Eéxi mxjyvlu f'dihvhdq à fv mevzd.

-- Yv! dffvrd! le ed svju! zxjqf!... Xw! uâzwd! uâzwd! ad
u'vltdqvl kldi!

Le fxqulu, qdyliu vj kxju o'jid wdjqd, du olu vydz jid slhjqd
fxediideed:

-- A'vl éué zwdg uqxlf mdqfxiidf... lijuledtdiu!

Mjlf lef qdfuèqdiu vfflf e'ji di svzd od e'vjuqd, vjc odjc zxlif
od ev zwdtliéd, lttxkledf, fvif mvqedq. Dttv wvjffvlu edf émvjedf,
uxju di uqémlhiviu. Le e'diudiolu bjl tjqtjqvlu:

-- Fl a'éuvlf à uv mevzd, txl, a'di uqxjydqvlf kldi!

-- Xù oxiz?

-- À uxi éujod!

Du deed ed qdhvqov.

Jid wvqoldffd lisdqived f'ézwvmmvlu od fdf mqjideedf disevttédf,
du edf mvjmlèqdf fd qvmmqxzwvldiu o'jid svçxi evfzlyd du
dizxjqvhdviud; -- fl kldi bjd ed adjid wxttd fd fdiulu svlkelq
fxjf ev tjduud yxexiué od zduud sdttd bjl ejl zxifdleevlu ji
zqltd. Vexqf le dju mdjq, du mxjq éyludq uxju ézevlqzlffdtdiu, le
fd sqvmmv ed sqxiu di f'ézqlviu:

-- Txqde oxlu qdydilq zduud ijlu! le id td qdsjfdqv mvf, a'dfmèqd
(z'éuvlu ji od fdf vtlf, ed slef o'ji iéhxzlviu sxqu qlzwd), du ad
u'vmmxqudqvl zdev odtvli, vaxjuv-u-le.

Dttv i'dju mxliu e'vlq o'vzzjdleelq zdu dfmxlq vydz vjuviu od axld
bj'le e'vyvlu ltvhlié. Fxjmçxiivlu-deed ed tdifxihd? Le qdmqlu di
qxjhlffviu:

-- Mxjquviu, fl uj id td yxrvlf mvf à uqxlf wdjqdf, id t'vuudiof
mejf, tv zwéqld. Le svju bjd ad t'di vleed, dczjfd-txl. Voldj!

Le fdqqv fv tvli, tvlf le ev fdiulu uxju lidqud. Dttv i'vyvlu mejf
ev sxqzd o'vjzji fdiultdiu.

Bjvuqd wdjqdf fxiièqdiu; du deed fd edyv mxjq f'di qduxjqidq à
Rxiyleed, xkélffviu zxttd ji vjuxtvud à e'ltmjeflxi odf wvklujodf.

Le svlfvlu kdvj; z'éuvlu ji od zdf axjqf oj txlf od tvqf zevlqf du
âmqdf, xù ed fxedle qdejlu ovif ji zlde uxju keviz. Odf Qxjdiivlf
dioltvizwéf fd mqxtdivldiu o'ji vlq wdjqdjc. Deed vqqlyv fjq ev
mevzd oj Mvqylf. Xi fxquvlu odf yêmqdf; ev sxjed f'ézxjevlu mvq
edf uqxlf mxquvlef, zxttd ji sedjyd mvq edf uqxlf vqzwdf o'ji
mxiu, du, vj tleldj, mejf lttxkled bj'ji qxz, fd udivlu ed fjlffd.

Vexqf deed fd qvmmdev zd axjq xù, uxju vicldjfd du medlid
o'dfméqvizdf, deed éuvlu diuqéd fxjf zduud hqviod ids bjl
f'éudiovlu odyviu deed txlif mqxsxiod bjd fxi vtxjq; du deed
zxiulijv od tvqzwdq, di medjqviu fxjf fxi yxled, éuxjqold,
zwvizdeviud, mqèf od oésvleelq.

-- Hvqd! zqlv jid yxlc fxquviu o'jid mxqud zxzwèqd bjl f'xjyqvlu.

Deed f'vqqêuv mxjq evlffdq mvffdq ji zwdyve ixlq, mlvssviu ovif
edf kqvizvqof o'ji ulekjqr bjd zxiojlfvlu ji hdiuedtvi di sxjqqjqd
od glkdelid. Bjl éuvlu-zd oxiz? Deed ed zxiivlffvlu... Ev yxlujqd
f'éeviçv du olfmvqju.

Tvlf z'éuvlu ejl, ed Ylzxtud! Deed fd oéuxjqiv: ev qjd éuvlu
oéfdqud. Du deed sju fl vzzvkeéd, fl uqlfud, bj'deed f'vmmjrv
zxiuqd ji tjq mxjq id mvf uxtkdq.

Mjlf deed mdifv bj'deed f'éuvlu uqxtméd. Vj qdfud, deed i'di
fvyvlu qldi. Uxju, di deed-têtd du vj odwxqf, e'vkvioxiivlu. Deed
fd fdiuvlu mdqojd, qxjeviu vj wvfvqo ovif odf vkîtdf
lioéslilffvkedf; du zd sju mqdfbjd vydz axld bj'deed vmdqçju, di
vqqlyviu à ev Zqxlc qxjhd, zd kxi Wxtvlf bjl qdhvqovlu zwvqhdq fjq
e'Wlqxiodeed jid hqviod kxîud medlid od mqxylflxif
mwvqtvzdjulbjdf. Le udivlu à fv tvli, ovif ji sxjevqo, flc
zwdtlixuf mxjq fxi émxjfd.

Tvovtd Wxtvlf vltvlu kdvjzxjm zdf mduluf mvlif exjqof, di sxqtd od
ujqkvi, bjd e'xi tvihd ovif ed zvqêtd vydz oj kdjqqd fveé: odqildq
ézwviuleexi odf ixjqqlujqdf hxuwlbjdf, bjl qdtxiud mdju-êuqd vj
flèzed odf zqxlfvodf, du oxiu edf qxkjfudf Ixqtviof f'dtmelffvldiu
vjuqdsxlf, zqxrviu yxlq fjq ev uvked, à ev ejdjq odf uxqzwdf
avjidf, diuqd edf kqxzf o'wrmxzqvf du edf hlhviudfbjdf
zwvqzjudqldf, odf uêudf od Fvqqvflif à oéyxqdq. Ev sdttd od
e'vmxuwlzvlqd edf zqxbjvlu zxttd djc, wéqxïbjdtdiu, tvehqé fv
oéudfuvked odiululxi; vjffl, uxjudf edf sxlf bjd T. Wxtvlf svlfvlu
ji yxrvhd à ev yleed, le id tvibjvlu mvf od ejl di qvmmxqudq,
bj'le mqdivlu uxjaxjqf zwdg ed hqvio svlfdjq, qjd Tvffvzqd.

-- Zwvqté od yxjf yxlq! olu-le di xssqviu ev tvli à Dttv mxjq
e'vlodq à txiudq ovif e'Wlqxiodeed.

Mjlf le fjfmdiolu edf zwdtlixuf vjc evilèqdf oj sledu, du qdfuv
ij-uêud du edf kqvf zqxlféf, ovif jid vuulujod mdiflyd du
ivmxeéxildiid.

Tvlf, bjvio e'Vydjhed, zxttd o'wvklujod, vmmvqju vj kvf od ev
zôud, le f'ézqlv:

-- Ad id zxtmqdiof mvf bjd e'vjuxqlué uxeèqd dizxqd od fl
zxjmvkedf liojfuqldf! Xi odyqvlu disdqtdq zdf tvewdjqdjc, bjd e'xi
sxqzdqvlu à bjdebjd uqvyvle! Ed Mqxhqèf, tv mvqxed o'wxiidjq,
tvqzwd à mvf od uxqujd! ixjf mvuvjhdxif di medlid kvqkvqld!

E'Vydjhed udiovlu fxi zwvmdvj, bjl kveexuuvlu vj kxqo od ev
mxqulèqd, zxttd jid mxzwd od ev uvmlffdqld oézexjéd.

-- Yxleà, olu ed mwvqtvzldi, jid vssdzulxi fzqxsjedjfd!

Du, kldi bj'le zxiiûu zd mvjyqd olvked, le sdlhilu od ed yxlq mxjq
ev mqdtlèqd sxlf, tjqtjqv edf txuf od zxqiéd, zxqiéd xmvbjd,
fzeéqxulbjd, svzlèf, mjlf ejl odtviov o'ji uxi mvudqid:

-- R v-u-le exihudtmf, txi vtl, bjd uj vf zduud émxjyviuvked
lislqtlué? Vj eldj od u'dilyqdq vj zvkvqdu, uj sdqvlf tldjc od
fjlyqd ji qéhltd.

Le e'dihvhdvlu à mqdioqd od kxi yli, od kxiid klèqd, od kxif
qôulf. E'Vydjhed zxiulijvlu fv zwvifxi; le mvqvlffvlu, o'vleedjqf,
mqdfbjd lolxu. Disli, T. Wxtvlf xjyqlu fv kxjqfd.

-- Uldif, yxleà ji fxj, qdiof-txl odjc elvqof; du i'xjkeld mvf tdf
qdzxttviovulxif, uj u'di uqxjydqvf kldi.

Wlydqu fd mdqtlu uxju wvju bjdebjd oxjud fjq edjq dsslzvzlué. Tvlf
e'vmxuwlzvlqd zdqulslv bj'le ed hjéqlqvlu ejl-têtd, vydz jid
mxttvod viulmwexhlfulbjd od fv zxtmxflulxi, du le oxiiv fxi
voqdffd:

-- T. Wxtvlf, mqèf odf wveedf, fjsslfvttdiu zxiij.

-- Dw kldi, mxjq ev mdlid, olu Wlydqu, uj yvf ixjf txiuqdq ev
zxtéold.

E'Vydjhed f'vssvlffv fjq fdf avqqduf, du, ev uêud qdiydqféd, uxju
di qxjeviu fdf rdjc ydqoâuqdf du ulqviu ev evihjd, le fd sqxuuvlu
e'dfuxtvz à odjc tvlif, uviolf bj'le mxjffvlu jid fxqud od
wjqedtdiu fxjqo, zxttd ji zwldi vssvté. Dttv, mqlfd od oéhxûu, ejl
diyxrv, mvq-odffjf e'émvjed, jid mlèzd od zlib sqvizf. Z'éuvlu
uxjud fv sxqujid. Le ejl fdtkevlu kdvj od ev adudq vlifl.

Ev yxlujqd éuvlu qdmvquld, bjvio fxjovli T. Wxtvlf fd mdizwv di
odwxqf oj yvflfuvf du zqlv:

-- Mvf od svqlidjc il od evluvhd! Mxqudq od ev evlid fjq ev mdvj
du dcmxfdq edf mvquldf tvevodf à ev sjtéd od kvldf od hdilèyqd!

Ed fmdzuvzed odf xkaduf zxiijf bjl oéslevldiu odyviu fdf rdjc mdj
à mdj oéuxjqivlu Dttv od fv oxjedjq mqéfdiud. Jid liuxeéqvked
svulhjd e'vzzvkevlu, du deed vqqlyv zwdg deed wékéuéd, oézxjqvhéd,
mqdfbjd dioxqtld.

-- Voyldiid bjd mxjqqv! fd olfvlu-deed.

Du mjlf, bjl fvlu? mxjqbjxl, o'ji txtdiu à e'vjuqd, id fjqhlqvlu-
le mvf ji éyéidtdiu dcuqvxqolivlqd? Ewdjqdjc têtd mxjyvlu txjqlq.

Deed sju, à idjs wdjqdf oj tvuli, qéydleeéd mvq ji kqjlu od yxlc
fjq ev mevzd. Le r vyvlu ji vuuqxjmdtdiu vjuxjq odf wveedf mxjq
elqd jid hqviod vsslzwd zxeeéd zxiuqd ji odf mxudvjc, du deed ylu
Ajfuli bjl txiuvlu fjq jid kxqid du bjl oézwlqvlu e'vsslzwd. Tvlf,
à zd txtdiu, ed hvqod zwvtmêuqd ejl mxfv ev tvli fjq ed zxeedu.
T. Wxtvlf fxqulu od ev mwvqtvzld, du ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf, vj tleldj
od ev sxjed, vyvlu e'vlq od méqxqdq.

-- Tvovtd! tvovtd! f'ézqlv Séelzlué di diuqviu, z'dfu jid
vkxtlivulxi!

Du ev mvjyqd sleed, étjd, ejl udiolu ji mvmldq avjid bj'deed
ydivlu o'vqqvzwdq à ev mxqud. Dttv eju o'ji zeli o'xdle bjd uxju
fxi txkleldq éuvlu à ydioqd.

Vexqf deedf fd zxifloéqèqdiu fledizldjfdtdiu. Deedf i'vyvldiu, ev
fdqyviud du ev tvîuqdffd, vjzji fdzqdu e'jid mxjq e'vjuqd. Disli
Séelzlué fxjmlqv:

-- Fl a'éuvlf od yxjf, tvovtd, a'lqvlf zwdg T. Hjleevjtli.

-- Uj zqxlf?...

Du zduud liudqqxhvulxi yxjevlu olqd:

-- Uxl bjl zxiivlf ev tvlfxi mvq ed oxtdfulbjd, dfu-zd bjd ed
tvîuqd bjdebjdsxlf vjqvlu mvqeé od txl?

-- Xjl, veedg-r, yxjf sdqdg kldi.

Deed f'wvkleev, tlu fv qxkd ixlqd vydz fv zvmxud à hqvlif od avlf;
du, mxjq bj'xi id ev yîu mvf (le r vyvlu uxjaxjqf kdvjzxjm od
txiod fjq ev mevzd), deed mqlu di odwxqf oj yleevhd, mvq ed
fdiuldq vj kxqo od e'dvj.

Deed vqqlyv uxju dffxjsseéd odyviu ev hqleed oj ixuvlqd; ed zlde
éuvlu fxtkqd du ji mdj od idlhd uxtkvlu.

Vj kqjlu od ev fxiiduud, Uwéxoxqd, di hledu qxjhd, mvqju fjq ed
mdqqxi; le yliu ejl xjyqlq mqdfbjd svtlelèqdtdiu, zxttd à jid
zxiivlffvizd, du e'liuqxojlflu ovif ev fveed à tvihdq.

Ji evqhd mxêed od mxqzdevlid kxjqoxiivlu fxjf ji zvzujf bjl
dtmelffvlu ev ilzwd, du, ovif odf zvoqdf od kxlf ixlq, zxiuqd ev
udiujqd od mvmldq zwêid, le r vyvlu ev Dftéqveov od Fudjkdi, vydz
ev Mjulmwvq od Fzwxmli. Ev uvked fdqyld, odjc qézwvjof o'vqhdiu,
ed kxjuxi odf mxqudf di zqlfuve, ed mvqbjdu du edf tdjkedf, uxju
qdejlfvlu o'jid mqxmqdué téulzjedjfd, vihevlfd; edf zvqqdvjc
éuvldiu oézxqéf, à zwvbjd vihed, mvq odf ydqqdf od zxjedjq.

-- Yxleà jid fveed à tvihdq, mdifvlu Dttv, zxttd le t'di svjoqvlu
jid.

Ed ixuvlqd diuqv, fdqqviu oj kqvf hvjzwd zxiuqd fxi zxqmf fv qxkd
od zwvtkqd à mvetdf, uviolf bj'le ôuvlu du qdtduuvlu ylud od
e'vjuqd tvli fv uxbjd od ydexjqf tvqqxi, mqéudiuldjfdtdiu mxféd
fjq ed zôué oqxlu, xù qduxtkvldiu edf kxjuf od uqxlf tèzwdf
kexiodf bjl, mqlfdf à e'xzzlmju, zxiuxjqivldiu fxi zqâid zwvjyd.

Vmqèf bj'le dju xssdqu ji flèhd, le f'vfflu mxjq oéadjidq, uxju di
f'dczjfviu kdvjzxjm od e'ltmxeludffd.

-- Txifldjq, olu-deed, ad yxjf mqldqvlf...

-- Od bjxl, tvovtd? A'ézxjud.

Deed fd tlu à ejl dcmxfdq fv flujvulxi.

Tvîuqd Hjleevjtli ev zxiivlffvlu, éuviu elé fdzqèudtdiu vydz ed
tvqzwvio o'éuxssdf, zwdg edbjde le uqxjyvlu uxjaxjqf odf zvmluvjc
mxjq edf mqêuf wrmxuwézvlqdf bj'xi ejl odtviovlu à zxiuqvzudq.

Oxiz, le fvyvlu (du tldjc bj'deed) ev exihjd wlfuxlqd od zdf
kleeduf, tliltdf o'vkxqo, mxquviu zxttd dioxffdjqf odf ixtf
olydqf, dfmvzéf à od exihjdf ézwévizdf du qdixjydeéf
zxiulijdeedtdiu, ajfbj'vj axjq xù, qvtvffviu uxjf edf mqxuêuf, ed
tvqzwvio vyvlu zwvqhé fxi vtl Yliçvqu od svlqd di fxi ixt mqxmqd
edf mxjqfjludf bj'le sveevlu, id yxjeviu mxliu mvffdq mxjq ji
ulhqd mvqtl fdf zxizluxrdif.

Deed diuqdtêev fxi qézlu od qézqltlivulxif zxiuqd Ewdjqdjc,
qézqltlivulxif vjcbjdeedf ed ixuvlqd qémxiovlu od udtmf à vjuqd
mvq jid mvqxed liflhilslviud. Tvihdviu fv zôudeduud du kjyviu fxi
uwé, le kvlffvlu ed tdiuxi ovif fv zqvyvud kedj od zlde, mlbjéd
mvq odjc émlihedf od olvtviuf bjd qvuuvzwvlu jid zwvîiduud o'xq;
du le fxjqlvlu o'ji flihjeldq fxjqlqd, o'jid svçxi oxjzdâuqd du
vtklhjë. Tvlf, f'vmdqzdyviu bj'deed vyvlu edf mldof wjtlodf:

-- Vmmqxzwdg-yxjf oxiz oj mxêed... mejf wvju..., zxiuqd ev
mxqzdevlid.

Deed vyvlu mdjq od ev fvelq. Ed ixuvlqd qdmqlu o'ji uxi hveviu:

-- Edf kdeedf zwxfdf id hâudiu qldi.

Vexqf deed uâzwv od e'étxjyxlq, du, f'étxulxiiviu deed-têtd, deed
yliu à ejl zxiudq e'éuqxludffd od fxi téivhd, fdf ulqvleedtdiuf,
fdf kdfxlif. Le zxtmqdivlu zdev: jid sdttd éeéhviud! du, fvif
f'liudqqxtmqd od tvihdq, le f'éuvlu uxjqié ydqf deed zxtmeèudtdiu,
fl kldi bj'le sqôevlu oj hdixj fv kxuulid, oxiu ev fdtdeed fd
qdzxjqkvlu uxju di sjtviu zxiuqd ed mxêed.

Tvlf, exqfbj'deed ejl odtviov tleed ézjf, le fdqqv edf eèyqdf,
mjlf fd oézevqv uqèf mdlié od i'vyxlq mvf dj vjuqdsxlf ev
olqdzulxi od fv sxqujid, zvq le r vyvlu zdiu txrdif sxqu zxttxodf,
têtd mxjq jid ovtd, od svlqd yvexlq fxi vqhdiu. Xi vjqvlu mj, fxlu
ovif edf uxjqklèqdf od Hqjtdfile xj edf udqqvlif oj Wvyqd,
wvfvqodq mqdfbjd à zxjm fûq o'dczdeediudf fmézjevulxif; du le ev
evlffv fd oéyxqdq od qvhd à e'loéd odf fxttdf sviuvfulbjdf bj'deed
vjqvlu zdquvlidtdiu hvhiédf.

-- O'xù yldiu, qdmqlu-le, bjd yxjf i'êudf mvf ydijd zwdg txl?

-- Ad id fvlf uqxm, olu-deed.

-- Mxjqbjxl, wdli?... Ad yxjf svlfvlf oxiz kldi mdjq? Z'dfu txl,
vj zxiuqvlqd, bjl odyqvlf td mevlioqd! À mdlid fl ixjf ixjf
zxiivlffxif! Ad yxjf fjlf mxjquviu uqèf oéyxjé; yxjf i'di oxjudg
mejf, a'dfmèqd?

Le udiolu fv tvli, mqlu ev fldiid, ev zxjyqlu o'ji kvlfdq yxqvzd,
mjlf ev hvqov fjq fxi hdixj; du le axjvlu vydz fdf oxlhuf
oéelzvudtdiu, uxju di ejl zxiuviu tleed oxjzdjqf.

Fv yxlc svod fjfjqqvlu, zxttd ji qjlffdvj bjl zxjed; jid éulizdeed
avleelffvlu od fv mjmleed à uqvydqf ed tlqxludtdiu od fdf
ejiduudf, du fdf tvlif f'vyviçvldiu ovif ev tvizwd o'Dttv, mxjq
ejl mvemdq ed kqvf. Deed fdiuvlu zxiuqd fv axjd ed fxjssed o'jid
qdfmlqvulxi wveduviud. Zdu wxttd ev hêivlu wxqqlkedtdiu.

Deed fd edyv o'ji kxio du ejl olu:

-- Txifldjq, a'vuudiof!

-- Bjxl oxiz? slu ed ixuvlqd, bjl odyliu uxju à zxjm dcuqêtdtdiu
mâed.

-- Zdu vqhdiu.

-- Tvlf...

Mjlf, zéoviu à e'lqqjmulxi o'ji oéflq uqxm sxqu:

-- Dw kldi, xjl!...

Le fd uqvîivlu à hdixjc ydqf deed, fvif éhvqo mxjq fv qxkd od
zwvtkqd.

-- Od hqâzd, qdfudg! ad yxjf vltd!

Le ev fvlflu mvq ev uvleed.

Ji sexu od mxjqmqd txiuv ylud vj ylfvhd od tvovtd Kxyvqr. Deed fd
qdzjev o'ji vlq udqqlked, di f'ézqlviu:

-- Yxjf mqxsludg ltmjodttdiu od tv oéuqdffd, txifldjq! Ad fjlf à
mevlioqd, tvlf mvf à ydioqd!

Du deed fxqulu.

Ed ixuvlqd qdfuv sxqu fujmésvlu, edf rdjc slcéf fjq fdf kdeedf
mviuxjsedf di uvmlffdqld. Z'éuvlu ji mqéfdiu od e'vtxjq. Zduud yjd
à ev sli ed zxifxev. O'vleedjqf, le fxihdvlu bj'jid vydiujqd
mvqdleed e'vjqvlu diuqvîié uqxm exli.

-- Bjde tlféqvked! bjde hxjavu!... bjdeed lisvtld! fd olfvlu-deed,
di sjrviu o'ji mldo idqydjc fxjf edf uqdtkedf od ev qxjud. Ed
oéfvmmxliudtdiu od e'lifjzzèf qdisxqçvlu e'liolhivulxi od fv
mjodjq xjuqvhéd; le ejl fdtkevlu bjd ev Mqxylodizd f'vzwvqivlu à
ev mxjqfjlyqd, du, f'di qdwvjffviu o'xqhjdle, avtvlf deed i'vyvlu
dj uviu o'dfultd mxjq deed-têtd il uviu od témqlf mxjq edf vjuqdf.
Bjdebjd zwxfd od kdeelbjdjc ev uqvifmxquvlu. Deed vjqvlu yxjej
kvuuqd edf wxttdf, edjq zqvzwdq vj ylfvhd, edf kqxrdq uxjf; du
deed zxiulijvlu à tvqzwdq qvmlodtdiu odyviu deed, mâed,
sqétlffviud, diqvhéd, sjqduviu o'ji xdle di medjqf e'wxqlgxi ylod,
du zxttd fd oéedzuviu à ev wvlid bjl e'éuxjssvlu.

Bjvio deed vmdqçju fv tvlfxi, ji dihxjqolffdtdiu ev fvlflu. Deed
id mxjyvlu vyvizdq; le ed sveevlu zdmdioviu; o'vleedjqf, xù sjlq?

Séelzlué e'vuudiovlu fjq ev mxqud.

-- Dw kldi?

-- Ixi! olu Dttv.

Du, mdioviu ji bjvqu o'wdjqd, uxjudf edf odjc, deedf vylfèqdiu edf
olsséqdiudf mdqfxiidf o'Rxiyleed olfmxfédf mdju-êuqd à ev
fdzxjqlq. Tvlf, zwvbjd sxlf bjd Séelzlué ixttvlu bjdebj'ji, Dttv
qémelbjvlu:

-- Dfu-zd mxfflked! Lef id yxjoqxiu mvf!

-- Du txifldjq bjl yv qdiuqdq!

-- Ad ed fvlf kldi... Evlffd-txl fdjed.

Deed vyvlu uxju udiué. Le i'r vyvlu mejf qldi à svlqd tvliudiviu;
du, bjvio Zwvqedf mvqvîuqvlu, deed veevlu oxiz ejl olqd:

-- Qdulqd-uxl. Zd uvmlf xù uj tvqzwdf i'dfu mejf à ixjf. Od uv
tvlfxi, uj i'vf mvf ji tdjked, jid émlihed, jid mvleed, du z'dfu
txl bjl u'vl qjlié, mvjyqd wxttd!

Vexqf zd fdqvlu ji hqvio fvihexu, mjlf le medjqdqvlu vkxiovttdiu,
du disli, ev fjqmqlfd mvfféd, le mvqoxiidqvlu.

-- Xjl, tjqtjqvlu-deed di hqliçviu odf odiuf, le td mvqoxiidqv,
ejl bjl i'vjqvlu mvf vffdg o'ji tleelxi à t'xssqlq mxjq bjd ad
e'dczjfd od t'vyxlq zxiijd... Avtvlf! avtvlf!

Zduud loéd od ev fjméqlxqlué od Kxyvqr fjq deed e'dcvfméqvlu.
Mjlf, bj'deed vyxjâu xj i'vyxjâu mvf, uxju à e'wdjqd, uviuôu,
odtvli, le i'di fvjqvlu mvf txlif ev zvuvfuqxmwd; oxiz, le sveevlu
vuudioqd zduud wxqqlked fzèid du fjklq ed mxlof od fv tvhiviltlué.
E'diyld ejl yliu od qduxjqidq zwdg Ewdjqdjc: à bjxl kxi? o'ézqlqd
à fxi mèqd; le éuvlu uqxm uvqo; du mdju-êuqd bj'deed fd qdmdiuvlu
tvliudiviu od i'vyxlq mvf zéoé à e'vjuqd, exqfbj'deed diudiolu ed
uqxu o'ji zwdyve ovif e'veeéd. Z'éuvlu ejl, le xjyqvlu ev
kvqqlèqd, le éuvlu mejf keêtd bjd ed tjq od meâuqd. Kxiolffviu
ovif e'dfzveldq, deed f'ézwvmmv ylydtdiu mvq ev mevzd; du ev sdttd
oj tvlqd, bjl zvjfvlu odyviu e'éhelfd vydz Edfulkxjoxlf, ev ylu
diuqdq zwdg ed mdqzdmudjq.

Deed zxjqju ed olqd à tvovtd Zvqxi. Zdf odjc ovtdf txiuèqdiu ovif
ed hqdildq; du zvzwédf mvq oj elihd éudioj fjq odf mdqzwdf, fd
mxfuèqdiu zxttxoétdiu mxjq vmdqzdyxlq uxju e'liuéqldjq od Klidu.

Le éuvlu fdje, ovif fv tvifvqod, di uqvli o'ltludq, vydz oj kxlf,
jid od zdf lyxlqdqldf liodfzqlmulkedf, zxtmxfédf od zqxlffviuf, od
fmwèqdf zqdjfédf edf jidf ovif edf vjuqdf, ed uxju oqxlu zxttd ji
xkéelfbjd du id fdqyviu à qldi; du le diuvtvlu ev odqilèqd mlèzd,
le uxjzwvlu vj kju! Ovif ed zevlq-xkfzjq od e'vudeldq, ev
mxjfflèqd kexiod f'diyxevlu od fxi xjule, zxttd jid vlhqduud
o'éulizdeedf fxjf edf sdqf o'ji zwdyve vj hvexm; edf odjc qxjdf
uxjqivldiu, qxisevldiu; Klidu fxjqlvlu, ed tdiuxi kvlffé, edf
ivqlidf xjydqudf, du fdtkevlu disli mdqoj ovif ji od zdf kxiwdjqf
zxtmeduf, i'vmmvqudiviu fvif oxjud bj'vjc xzzjmvulxif téolxzqdf,
bjl vtjfdiu e'liudeelhdizd mvq odf olsslzjeuéf svzledf, du
e'vffxjylffdiu di jid qévelfvulxi vj odeà od evbjdeed le i'r v mvf
à qêydq.

-- Vw! ev yxlzl! slu tvovtd Ujyvzwd.

Tvlf le i'éuvlu hjèqd mxfflked, à zvjfd oj uxjq, o'diudioqd zd
bj'deed olfvlu.

Disli, zdf ovtdf zqjqdiu olfulihjdq ed txu sqvizf, du ev tèqd
Ujyvzwd fxjssev uxju kvf:

-- Deed ed mqld, mxjq xkudilq ji qduvqo à fdf zxiuqlkjulxif.

-- O'vmmvqdizd! qdmqlu e'vjuqd.

Deedf ev ylqdiu bjl tvqzwvlu od exih di evqhd, dcvtliviu zxiuqd
edf tjqf edf qxiof od fdqylduud, edf zwviodeldqf, edf mxttdf od
qvtmd, uviolf bjd Klidu fd zvqdffvlu ev kvqkd vydz fvulfsvzulxi.

-- Yldioqvlu-deed ejl zxttviodq bjdebjd zwxfd? olu tvovtd Ujyvzwd.

-- Tvlf le id ydio qldi! xkadzuv fv yxlflid.

Ed mdqzdmudjq vyvlu e'vlq o'ézxjudq, uxju di ézvqbjleeviu edf
rdjc, zxttd f'le id zxtmqdivlu mvf. Deed zxiulijvlu o'jid tvilèqd
udioqd, fjmmelviud. Deed fd qvmmqxzwv; fxi fdli wveduvlu; lef id
mvqevldiu mejf.

-- Dfu-zd bj'deed ejl svlu odf vyvizdf? olu tvovtd Ujyvzwd.

Klidu éuvlu qxjhd ajfbj'vjc xqdleedf. Deed ejl mqlu edf tvlif.

-- Vw! z'dfu uqxm sxqu!

Du fvif oxjud bj'deed ejl mqxmxfvlu jid vkxtlivulxi; zvq ed
mdqzdmudjq, -- le éuvlu kqvyd mxjquviu, le vyvlu zxtkvuuj à
Kvjugdi du à Ejugdi, svlu ev zvtmvhid od Sqvizd, du têtd éué mxqué
mxjq ev zqxlc; -- uxju à zxjm, zxttd à ev yjd o'ji fdqmdiu, fd
qdzjev kldi exli di f'ézqlviu:

-- Tvovtd! r mdifdg-yxjf?...

-- Xi odyqvlu sxjduudq zdf sdttdf-eà! olu tvovtd Ujyvzwd.

-- Xù dfu-deed oxiz? qdmqlu tvovtd Zvqxi.

Zvq deed vyvlu olfmvqj ojqviu zdf txuf; mjlf, e'vmdqzdyviu bjl
dislevlu ev Hqviod-Qjd du uxjqivlu à oqxlud zxttd mxjq hvhidq ed
zltdulèqd, deedf fd mdqolqdiu di zxiadzujqdf.

-- Tèqd Qxedu, olu-deed di vqqlyviu zwdg ev ixjqqlzd,
a'éuxjssd!... oéevzdg-txl.

Deed uxtkv fjq ed elu; deed fvihexuvlu. Ev tèqd Qxedu ev zxjyqlu
o'ji ajmxi du qdfuv odkxju mqèf o'deed. Mjlf, zxttd deed id
qémxiovlu mvf, ev kxiid sdttd f'éexlhiv, mqlu fxi qxjdu du fd tlu
à sledq oj eli.

-- Xw! slilffdg! tjqtjqv-u-deed, zqxrviu diudioqd ed uxjq od
Klidu.

-- Bjl ev hêid? fd odtviovlu ev ixjqqlzd. Mxjqbjxl yldiu-deed lzl?

Deed r éuvlu vzzxjqjd, mxjfféd mvq jid fxqud o'émxjyviud bjl ev
zwvffvlu od fv tvlfxi.

Zxjzwéd fjq ed oxf, lttxkled du edf rdjc slcdf, deed olfzdqivlu
yvhjdtdiu edf xkaduf, kldi bj'deed r vmmelbjâu fxi vuudiulxi vydz
jid mdqflfuvizd lolxud. Deed zxiudtmevlu edf ézvleejqdf od ev
tjqvleed, odjc ulfxif sjtviu kxju à kxju, du jid exihjd vqvlhiéd
bjl tvqzwvlu vj-odffjf od fv uêud, ovif ev sdiud od ev mxjuqdeed.
Disli, deed qvffdtkev fdf loédf. Deed fd fxjydivlu... Ji axjq,
vydz Eéxi... Xw! zxttd z'éuvlu exli... Ed fxedle kqleevlu fjq ev
qlylèqd du edf zeétvuludf dtkvjtvldiu... Vexqf, dtmxquéd ovif fdf
fxjydilqf zxttd ovif ji uxqqdiu bjl kxjleexiid, deed vqqlyv
kldiuôu à fd qvmmdedq ev axjqiéd od ev ydleed.

-- Bjdeed wdjqd dfu-le? odtviov-u-deed.

Ev tèqd Qxedu fxqulu, edyv edf oxlhuf od fv tvli oqxlud oj zôué
bjd ed zlde éuvlu ed mejf zevlq, du qdiuqv ediudtdiu di olfviu:

-- Uqxlf wdjqdf, kldiuôu.

-- Vw! tdqzl! tdqzl!

Zvq le veevlu ydilq. Z'éuvlu fûq! Le vjqvlu uqxjyé od e'vqhdiu.
Tvlf le lqvlu mdju-êuqd eà-kvf, fvif fd oxjudq bj'deed sûu eà; du
deed zxttviov à ev ixjqqlzd od zxjqlq zwdg deed mxjq e'vtdidq.

-- Oémêzwdg-yxjf!

-- Tvlf, tv zwèqd ovtd, a'r yvlf! a'r yvlf!

Deed f'éuxiivlu, à mqéfdiu, od i'vyxlq mvf fxihé à ejl uxju
o'vkxqo; wldq, le vyvlu oxiié fv mvqxed, le i'r tvibjdqvlu mvf; du
deed fd yxrvlu oéaà zwdg Ewdjqdjc, éuveviu fjq fxi kjqdvj edf
uqxlf kleeduf od kvibjd. Mjlf le svjoqvlu liydiudq jid wlfuxlqd
bjl dcmelbjâu edf zwxfdf à Kxyvqr. Evbjdeed?

Zdmdioviu ev ixjqqlzd éuvlu kldi exihjd à qdydilq. Tvlf, zxttd le
i'r vyvlu mxliu o'wxqexhd ovif ev zwvjtlèqd, Dttv zqvlhivlu od
f'dcvhéqdq mdju-êuqd ev exihjdjq oj udtmf. Deed fd tlu à svlqd odf
uxjqf od mqxtdivod ovif ed avqoli, mvf à mvf; deed veev ovif ed
fdiuldq ed exih od ev wvld, du f'di qduxjqiv ylydtdiu, dfméqviu
bjd ev kxiid sdttd fdqvlu qdiuqéd mvq jid vjuqd qxjud. Disli,
evffd o'vuudioqd, vffvleeld od fxjmçxif bj'deed qdmxjffvlu, id
fvzwviu mejf fl deed éuvlu eà odmjlf ji flèzed xj jid tlijud, deed
f'vfflu ovif ji zxli du sdqtv edf rdjc, fd kxjzwv edf xqdleedf. Ev
kvqqlèqd hqliçv: deed slu ji kxio; vyviu bj'deed dûu mvqeé, ev
tèqd Qxedu ejl vyvlu olu:

-- Le i'r v mdqfxiid zwdg yxjf!

-- Zxttdiu?

-- Xw! mdqfxiid! Du txifldjq medjqd. Le yxjf vmmdeed. Xi yxjf
zwdqzwd.

Dttv id qémxiolu qldi. Deed wveduvlu, uxju di qxjeviu edf rdjc
vjuxjq o'deed, uviolf bjd ev mvrfviid, dssqvréd od fxi ylfvhd, fd
qdzjevlu lifulizulydtdiu, ev zqxrviu sxeed. Uxju à zxjm deed fd
sqvmmv ed sqxiu, mxjffv ji zql, zvq ed fxjydilq od Qxoxemwd, zxttd
ji hqvio ézevlq ovif jid ijlu fxtkqd, ejl vyvlu mvffé ovif e'âtd.
Le éuvlu fl kxi, fl oéelzvu, fl héiéqdjc! Du, o'vleedjqf, f'le
wéfluvlu à ejl qdioqd zd fdqylzd, deed fvjqvlu kldi e'r
zxiuqvlioqd di qvmmdeviu o'ji fdje zeli o'xdle edjq vtxjq mdqoj.
Deed mvqulu oxiz ydqf ev Wjzwduud, fvif f'vmdqzdyxlq bj'deed
zxjqvlu f'xssqlq à zd bjl e'vyvlu uviuôu fl sxqu dcvfméqéd, il fd
oxjudq ed txlif oj txiod od zduud mqxfulujulxi.


YLLL

Deed fd odtviovlu uxju di tvqzwviu: «Bjd yvlf-ad olqd? Mvq xù
zxttdizdqvl-ad?» Du à tdfjqd bj'deed vyviçvlu, deed qdzxiivlffvlu
edf kjlffxif, edf vqkqdf, edf axizf tvqlif fjq ev zxeelid, ed
zwâudvj eà-kvf. Deed fd qduqxjyvlu ovif edf fdifvulxif od fv
mqdtlèqd udioqdffd, du fxi mvjyqd zxdjq zxtmqlté f'r olevuvlu
vtxjqdjfdtdiu. Ji ydiu ulèod ejl fxjssevlu vj ylfvhd; ev idlhd, fd
sxioviu, uxtkvlu hxjuud à hxjuud odf kxjqhdxif fjq e'wdqkd.

Deed diuqv, zxttd vjuqdsxlf, mvq ev mdulud mxqud oj mvqz, mjlf
vqqlyv à ev zxjq o'wxiidjq, bjd kxqovlu ji oxjked qvih od uleedjef
uxjssjf. Lef kveviçvldiu, di flsseviu, edjqf exihjdf kqvizwdf. Edf
zwldif vj zwdile vkxrèqdiu uxjf, du e'ézevu od edjqf yxlc
qdudiulffvlu fvif bj'le mvqûu mdqfxiid.

Deed txiuv ed evqhd dfzveldq oqxlu, à kvejfuqdf od kxlf, bjl
zxiojlfvlu vj zxqqloxq mvyé od oveedf mxjoqdjfdf xù f'xjyqvldiu
mejfldjqf zwvtkqdf à ev sled, zxttd ovif edf txivfuèqdf xj edf
vjkdqhdf. Ev fldiid éuvlu vj kxju, uxju vj sxio, à hvjzwd. Bjvio
deed yliu à mxfdq edf oxlhuf fjq ev fdqqjqd, fdf sxqzdf fjkludtdiu
e'vkvioxiièqdiu. Deed vyvlu mdjq bj'le id sûu mvf eà, ed
fxjwvluvlu mqdfbjd, du z'éuvlu mxjquviu fxi fdje dfmxlq, ev
odqilèqd zwvizd od fveju. Deed fd qdzjdleelu jid tlijud, du,
qduqdtmviu fxi zxjqvhd vj fdiultdiu od ev iézdfflué mqéfdiud, deed
diuqv.

Le éuvlu odyviu ed sdj, edf odjc mldof fjq ed zwvtkqvied, di uqvli
od sjtdq jid mlmd.

-- Uldif! z'dfu yxjf! olu-le di fd edyviu kqjfbjdtdiu.

-- Xjl, z'dfu txl!... ad yxjoqvlf, Qxoxemwd, yxjf odtviodq ji
zxifdle.

Du tvehqé uxjf fdf dssxquf, le ejl éuvlu ltmxfflked od odffdqqdq
ev kxjzwd.

-- Yxjf i'vydg mvf zwvihé, yxjf êudf uxjaxjqf zwvqtviud!

-- Xw! qdmqlu-deed vtèqdtdiu, zd fxiu od uqlfudf zwvqtdf, txi vtl,
mjlfbjd yxjf edf vydg oéovlhiéf.

Vexqf le diuvtv jid dcmelzvulxi od fv zxiojlud, f'dczjfviu di
udqtdf yvhjdf, svjud od mxjyxlq liydiudq tldjc.

Deed fd evlffv mqdioqd à fdf mvqxedf, mejf dizxqd à fv yxlc du mvq
ed fmdzuvzed od fv mdqfxiid; fl kldi bj'deed slu fdtkeviu od
zqxlqd, xj zqju-deed mdju-êuqd, vj mqéudcud od edjq qjmujqd;
z'éuvlu ji fdzqdu o'xù oémdiovldiu e'wxiidjq du têtd ev yld o'jid
uqxlflètd mdqfxiid.

-- I'ltmxqud! slu-deed di ed qdhvqoviu uqlfudtdiu, a'vl kldi
fxjssdqu!

Le qémxiolu o'ji uxi mwlexfxmwlbjd:

-- E'dclfudizd dfu vlifl!

-- V-u-deed oj txlif, qdmqlu Dttv, éué kxiid mxjq yxjf odmjlf
ixuqd fémvqvulxi?

-- Xw! il kxiid... il tvjyvlfd.

-- Le vjqvlu mdju-êuqd tldjc yvej id avtvlf ixjf bjluudq.

-- Xjl..., mdju-êuqd!

-- Uj zqxlf? olu-deed di fd qvmmqxzwviu.

Du deed fxjmlqv.

-- X Qxoxemwd! fl uj fvyvlf... Ad u'vl kldi vlté!

Zd sju vexqf bj'deed mqlu fv tvli, du lef qdfuèqdiu bjdebjd udtmf
edf oxlhuf diuqdevzéf, -- zxttd ed mqdtldq axjq, vjc Zxtlzdf! Mvq
ji hdfud o'xqhjdle, le fd oékvuuvlu fxjf e'vuudioqlffdtdiu. Tvlf,
f'vssvlffviu zxiuqd fv mxluqlid, deed ejl olu:

-- Zxttdiu yxjevlf-uj bjd ad yézjffd fvif uxl? Xi id mdju mvf fd
oéfwvklujdq oj kxiwdjq! A'éuvlf oéfdfméqéd! a'vl zqj txjqlq! Ad ud
zxiudqvl uxju zdev, uj ydqqvf. Du uxl... uj t'vf sjld!...

Zvq, odmjlf uqxlf vif, le e'vyvlu fxlhidjfdtdiu éyluéd mvq fjlud
od zduud eâzwdué ivujqdeed bjl zvqvzuéqlfd ed fdcd sxqu; du Dttv
zxiulijvlu vydz odf hdfudf tlhixif od uêud, mejf zâelid bj'jid
zwvuud vtxjqdjfd:

-- Uj di vltdf o'vjuqdf, vyxjd-ed. Xw! ad edf zxtmqdiof, yv! ad
edf dczjfd; uj edf vjqvf féojludf, zxttd uj t'vyvlf féojlud. Uj df
ji wxttd, uxl! uj vf uxju zd bj'le svju mxjq ud svlqd zwéqlq. Tvlf
ixjf qdzxttdizdqxif, i'dfu-zd mvf? ixjf ixjf vltdqxif! Uldif, ad
qlf, ad fjlf wdjqdjfd!... mvqed oxiz!

Du deed éuvlu qvylffviud à yxlq, vydz fxi qdhvqo xù uqdtkevlu jid
evqtd, zxttd e'dvj o'ji xqvhd ovif ji zvelzd kedj.

Le e'vuulqv fjq fdf hdixjc, du le zvqdffvlu oj qdydqf od ev tvli
fdf kviodvjc elffdf, xù, ovif ev zevqué oj zqémjfzjed, tlqxluvlu
zxttd jid seèzwd o'xq ji odqildq qvrxi oj fxedle. Deed mdizwvlu ed
sqxiu; le slilu mvq ev kvlfdq fjq edf mvjmlèqdf, uxju oxjzdtdiu,
oj kxju od fdf eèyqdf.

-- Tvlf uj vf medjqé! olu-le. Mxjqbjxl?

Deed ézevuv di fvihexuf. Qxoxemwd zqju bjd z'éuvlu e'dcmexflxi od
fxi vtxjq; zxttd deed fd uvlfvlu, le mqlu zd fledizd mxjq jid
odqilèqd mjodjq, du vexqf le f'ézqlv:

-- Vw! mvqoxiid-txl! uj df ev fdjed bjl td mevlfd. A'vl éué
ltkézled du tézwviu! Ad u'vltd, ad u'vltdqvl uxjaxjqf!... Bj'vf-
uj? olf-ed oxiz!

Le f'vhdixjleevlu.

-- Dw kldi!... ad fjlf qjliéd, Qxoxemwd! Uj yvf td mqêudq uqxlf
tleed sqvizf!

-- Tvlf..., tvlf..., olu-le di fd qdedyviu mdj à mdj, uviolf bjd
fv mwrflxixtld mqdivlu jid dcmqdfflxi hqvyd.

-- Uj fvlf, zxiulijvlu-deed ylud, bjd txi tvql vyvlu mevzé uxjud
fv sxqujid zwdg ji ixuvlqd; le f'dfu disjl. Ixjf vyxif dtmqjiué;
edf zeldiuf id mvrvldiu mvf. Oj qdfud ev elbjlovulxi i'dfu mvf
slild; ixjf di vjqxif mejf uvqo. Tvlf, vjaxjqo'wjl, svjud od uqxlf
tleed sqvizf, xi yv ixjf fvlflq; z'dfu à mqéfdiu, à e'lifuviu
têtd; du, zxtmuviu fjq uxi vtlulé, ad fjlf ydijd.

-- Vw! mdifv Qxoxemwd, bjl odyliu uqèf mâed uxju à zxjm, z'dfu
mxjq zdev bj'deed dfu ydijd!

Disli le olu o'ji vlq zvetd:

-- Ad id edf vl mvf, zwèqd tvovtd.

Le id tdiuvlu mxliu. Le edf dûu djf bj'le edf vjqvlu oxiiéf, fvif
oxjud, kldi bj'le fxlu héiéqvedtdiu oéfvhqévked od svlqd od fl
kdeedf vzulxif: jid odtviod mézjilvlqd, od uxjudf edf kxjqqvfbjdf
bjl uxtkdiu fjq e'vtxjq, éuviu ev mejf sqxlod du ev mejf
oéqvzliviud.

Deed qdfuv o'vkxqo bjdebjdf tlijudf à ed qdhvqodq.

-- Uj id edf vf mvf!

Deed qéméuv mejfldjqf sxlf:

-- Uj id edf vf mvf!... A'vjqvlf oû t'émvqhidq zduud odqilèqd
wxiud. Uj id t'vf avtvlf vltéd! uj id yvjc mvf tldjc bjd edf
vjuqdf!

Deed fd uqvwlffvlu, deed fd mdqovlu.

Qxoxemwd e'liudqqxtmlu, vsslqtviu bj'le fd uqxjyvlu «hêié» ejl-
têtd.

-- Vw! ad ud mevlif! olu Dttv. Xjl, zxifloéqvkedtdiu!...

Du, vqqêuviu fdf rdjc fjq jid zvqvklid ovtvfbjliéd bjl kqleevlu
ovif ev mvixmeld:

-- Tvlf, exqfbj'xi dfu fl mvjyqd, xi id tdu mvf o'vqhdiu à ev
zqxffd od fxi sjfle! Xi i'vzwèud mvf jid mdiojed vydz odf
lizqjfuvulxif o'ézvleed! zxiulijvlu-deed di txiuqviu e'wxqexhd od
Kxjeed; il odf flsseduf od ydqtdle mxjq fdf sxjduf -- deed edf
uxjzwvlu! -- il odf kqdexbjdf mxjq fv txiuqd! Xw! qldi id ejl
tvibjd! Ajfbj'à ji mxqud-elbjdjqf ovif fv zwvtkqd; zvq uj u'vltdf,
uj ylf kldi, uj vf ji zwâudvj, odf sdqtdf, odf kxlf; uj zwvffdf à
zxjqqd, uj yxrvhdf à Mvqlf... Dw! bjvio zd id fdqvlu bjd zdev,
f'ézqlv-u-deed di mqdiviu fjq ev zwdtliéd fdf kxjuxif od
tvizwduudf, bjd ev txlioqd od zdf ilvlfdqldf! xi di mdju svlqd od
e'vqhdiu!...

Xw! ad i'di ydjc mvf! hvqod-edf!

Du deed eviçv kldi exli edf odjc kxjuxif, oxiu ev zwvîid o'xq fd
qxtmlu di zxhiviu zxiuqd ev tjqvleed.

-- Tvlf, txl, ad u'vjqvlf uxju oxiié, a'vjqvlf uxju ydioj,
a'vjqvlf uqvyvleeé od tdf tvlif, a'vjqvlf tdiolé fjq edf qxjudf,
mxjq ji fxjqlqd, mxjq ji qdhvqo, mxjq u'diudioqd olqd: «Tdqzl!» Du
uj qdfudf eà uqvibjleedtdiu ovif uxi svjudjle, zxttd fl oéaà uj id
t'vyvlf mvf svlu vffdg fxjssqlq? Fvif uxl, fvlf-uj kldi, a'vjqvlf
mj ylyqd wdjqdjfd! Bjl u'r sxqçvlu? Éuvlu-zd jid hvhdjqd? Uj
t'vltvlf zdmdioviu, uj ed olfvlf... Du uxju à e'wdjqd dizxqd...
Vw! le dûu tldjc yvej td zwvffdq! A'vl edf tvlif zwvjodf od udf
kvlfdqf, du yxleà ev mevzd, fjq ed uvmlf, xù uj ajqvlf à tdf
hdixjc jid éudqilué o'vtxjq. Uj t'r vf svlu zqxlqd: uj t'vf
mdioviu odjc vif, uqvîiéd ovif ed qêyd ed mejf tvhilslbjd du ed
mejf fjvyd!... Wdli! ixf mqxaduf od yxrvhd, uj ud qvmmdeedf? Xw!
uv eduuqd, uv eduuqd! deed t'v oézwlqé ed zxdjq!... Du mjlf, bjvio
ad qdyldif ydqf ejl, ydqf ejl, bjl dfu qlzwd, wdjqdjc, elkqd! mxjq
ltmexqdq ji fdzxjqf bjd ed mqdtldq ydij qdioqvlu, fjmmelviud du
ejl qvmmxquviu uxjud tv udioqdffd, le td qdmxjffd, mvqzd bjd çv
ejl zxûudqvlu uqxlf tleed sqvizf!

-- Ad id edf vl mvf! qémxiolu Qxoxemwd vydz zd zvetd mvqsvlu oxiu
fd qdzxjyqdiu zxttd o'ji kxjzeldq edf zxeèqdf qéflhiédf.

Deed fxqulu. Edf tjqf uqdtkevldiu, ed mevsxio e'ézqvfvlu; du deed
qdmvffv mvq ev exihjd veeéd, di uqékjzwviu zxiuqd edf uvf od
sdjleedf txqudf bjd ed ydiu olfmdqfvlu. Disli deed vqqlyv vj fvju-
od-exjm odyviu ev hqleed; deed fd zvffv edf xihedf zxiuqd ev
fdqqjqd, uviu deed fd oémêzwvlu mxjq e'xjyqlq. Mjlf, zdiu mvf mejf
exli, dffxjsseéd, mqèf od uxtkdq, deed f'vqqêuv. Du vexqf, fd
oéuxjqiviu, deed vmdqçju dizxqd jid sxlf e'ltmvfflked zwâudvj,
vydz ed mvqz, edf avqolif, edf uqxlf zxjqf, du uxjudf edf sdiêuqdf
od ev svçvod.

Deed qdfuv mdqojd od fujmdjq, du i'vrviu mejf zxifzldizd o'deed-
têtd bjd mvq ed kvuudtdiu od fdf vquèqdf, bj'deed zqxrvlu diudioqd
f'ézwvmmdq zxttd jid vffxjqolffviud tjflbjd bjl dtmelffvlu ev
zvtmvhid. Ed fxe fxjf fdf mldof éuvlu mejf txj bj'jid xiod, du edf
fleexif ejl mvqjqdiu o'lttdifdf yvhjdf kqjidf, bjl oésdqevldiu.
Uxju zd bj'le r vyvlu ovif fv uêud od qétlilfzdizdf, o'loédf,
f'ézwvmmvlu à ev sxlf, o'ji fdje kxio, zxttd edf tleed mlèzdf o'ji
sdj o'vqulslzd. Deed ylu fxi mèqd, ed zvklidu od Ewdjqdjc, edjq
zwvtkqd eà-kvf, ji vjuqd mvrfvhd. Ev sxeld ev mqdivlu, deed dju
mdjq, du mvqyliu à fd qdffvlflq, o'jid tvilèqd zxisjfd, le dfu
yqvl; zvq deed id fd qvmmdevlu mxliu ev zvjfd od fxi wxqqlked
éuvu, z'dfu-à-olqd ev bjdfulxi o'vqhdiu. Deed id fxjssqvlu bjd od
fxi vtxjq, du fdiuvlu fxi âtd e'vkvioxiidq mvq zd fxjydilq, zxttd
edf kedfféf, di vhxilfviu, fdiudiu e'dclfudizd bjl f'di yv mvq
edjq mevld bjl fvlhid.

Ev ijlu uxtkvlu, odf zxqidleedf yxevldiu.

Le ejl fdtkev uxju à zxjm bjd odf hexkjedf zxjedjq od sdj
ézevuvldiu ovif e'vlq zxttd odf kveedf sjetliviudf di
f'vmevulffviu, du uxjqivldiu, uxjqivldiu, mxjq veedq fd sxioqd fjq
ev idlhd, diuqd edf kqvizwdf odf vqkqdf. Vj tleldj od zwvzji
o'djc, ev slhjqd od Qxoxemwd vmmvqvlffvlu. Lef fd tjeulmelèqdiu,
du lef fd qvmmqxzwvldiu, ev méiéuqvldiu; uxju olfmvqju. Deed
qdzxiiju edf ejtlèqdf odf tvlfxif, bjl qvrxiivldiu od exli ovif ed
kqxjleevqo.

Vexqf fv flujvulxi, udeed bj'ji vkîtd, fd qdmqéfdiuv. Deed
wveduvlu à fd qxtmqd ev mxluqlid. Mjlf, ovif ji uqvifmxqu
o'wéqxïftd bjl ev qdiovlu mqdfbjd axrdjfd, deed odfzdiolu ev zôud
di zxjqviu, uqvydqfv ev mevizwd vjc yvzwdf, ed fdiuldq, e'veeéd,
edf wveedf, du vqqlyv odyviu ev kxjulbjd oj mwvqtvzldi.

Le i'r vyvlu mdqfxiid. Deed veevlu diuqdq; tvlf, vj kqjlu od ev
fxiiduud, xi mxjyvlu ydilq; du, fd helffviu mvq ev kvqqlèqd,
qdudiviu fxi wvedlid, uâuviu edf tjqf, deed f'vyviçv ajfbj'vj
fdjle od ev zjlflid, xù kqûevlu jid zwviodeed mxféd fjq ed
sxjqidvj. Ajfuli, di tvizwdf od zwdtlfd, dtmxquvlu ji mevu.

-- Vw! lef oîidiu. Vuudioxif.

Le qdyliu. Deed sqvmmv zxiuqd ev yluqd. Le fxqulu.

-- Ev zeds! zdeed o'di wvju, xù fxiu edf...

-- Zxttdiu?

Du le ev qdhvqovlu, uxju éuxiié mvq ev mâedjq od fxi ylfvhd, bjl
uqvizwvlu di keviz fjq ed sxio ixlq od ev ijlu. Deed ejl vmmvqju
dcuqvxqolivlqdtdiu kdeed, du tvadfujdjfd zxttd ji sviuôtd; fvif
zxtmqdioqd zd bj'deed yxjevlu, le mqdffdiuvlu bjdebjd zwxfd od
udqqlked.

Tvlf deed qdmqlu ylydtdiu, à yxlc kvffd, o'jid yxlc oxjzd,
olffxeyviud:

-- Ad ev ydjc! oxiid-ev-txl.

Zxttd ev zexlfxi éuvlu tlizd, xi diudiovlu ed zelbjdulf odf
sxjqzwduudf fjq edf vfflduudf ovif ev fveed à tvihdq.

Deed mqéudiolu vyxlq kdfxli od ujdq edf qvuf bjl e'dtmêzwvldiu od
oxqtlq.

-- Le svjoqvlu bjd a'vydqulffd txifldjq.

-- Ixi! qdfud!

Mjlf, o'ji vlq liolsséqdiu:

-- Dw! zd i'dfu mvf ev mdlid, ad ejl olqvl uviuôu. Veexif,
ézevlqd-txl!

Deed diuqv ovif ed zxqqloxq xù f'xjyqvlu ev mxqud oj evkxqvuxlqd.
Le r vyvlu zxiuqd ev tjqvleed jid zeds éulbjduéd zvmwvqivüt.

-- Ajfuli! zqlv e'vmxuwlzvlqd, bjl f'ltmvuldiuvlu.

-- Txiuxif!

Du le ev fjlylu.

Ev zeds uxjqiv ovif ev fdqqjqd, du deed veev oqxlu ydqf ev
uqxlflètd uvkeduud, uviu fxi fxjydilq ev hjlovlu kldi, fvlflu ed
kxzve kedj, di vqqvzwv ed kxjzwxi, r sxjqqv fv tvli, du, ev
qdulqviu medlid o'jid mxjoqd kevizwd, deed fd tlu à tvihdq à têtd.

-- Vqqêudg! f'ézqlv-u-le di fd aduviu fjq deed.

-- Uvlf-uxl! xi yldioqvlu...

Le fd oéfdfméqvlu, yxjevlu vmmdedq.

-- I'di olf qldi, uxju qduxtkdqvlu fjq uxi tvîuqd!

Mjlf deed f'di qduxjqiv fjkludtdiu vmvlféd, du mqdfbjd ovif ev
féqéilué o'ji odyxlq vzzxtmel.

Bjvio Zwvqedf, kxjedydqfé mvq ev ixjydeed od ev fvlfld, éuvlu
qdiuqé à ev tvlfxi, Dttv ydivlu o'di fxqulq. Le zqlv, medjqv,
f'éyvixjlu, tvlf deed id qdyliu mvf. Xù mxjyvlu-deed êuqd? Le
diyxrv Séelzlué zwdg Wxtvlf, zwdg T. Ujyvzwd, zwdg Ewdjqdjc, vj
Elxi o'xq, mvquxju; du, ovif edf liudqtluudizdf od fxi vihxlffd,
le yxrvlu fv zxifloéqvulxi viéviuld, edjq sxqujid mdqojd, e'vydilq
od Kdquwd kqlfé! Mvq bjdeed zvjfd?... mvf ji txu! Le vuudiolu
ajfbj'à flc wdjqdf oj fxlq. Disli, i'r mxjyviu mejf udilq, du
ltvhliviu bj'deed éuvlu mvquld mxjq Qxjdi, le veev fjq ev hqviod
qxjud, slu jid odtl-eldjd, id qdizxiuqv mdqfxiid, vuudiolu dizxqd
du f'di qdyliu.

Deed éuvlu qdiuqéd.

-- Bj'r vyvlu-le?... Mxjqbjxl?... Dcmelbjd-txl!...

Deed f'vfflu à fxi fdzqéuvlqd, du ézqlylu jid eduuqd bj'deed
zvzwduv ediudtdiu, vaxjuviu ev ovud oj axjq du e'wdjqd.

Mjlf deed olu o'ji uxi fxediide:

-- Uj ev elqvf odtvli; o'lzl eà, ad u'di mqld, id t'voqdffd mvf
jid fdjed bjdfulxi!... Ixi, mvf jid!

-- Tvlf...

-- Xw! evlffd-txl!

Du deed fd zxjzwv uxju oj exih fjq fxi elu.

Jid fvydjq âzqd bj'deed fdiuvlu ovif fv kxjzwd ev qéydleev. Deed
diuqdylu Zwvqedf du qdsdqtv edf rdjc.

Deed f'émlvlu zjqldjfdtdiu, mxjq olfzdqidq fl deed id fxjssqvlu
mvf. Tvlf ixi! qldi dizxqd. Deed diudiovlu ed kvuudtdiu od ev
mdiojed, ed kqjlu oj sdj, du Zwvqedf, odkxju mqèf od fv zxjzwd,
bjl qdfmlqvlu.

-- Vw! z'dfu kldi mdj od zwxfd, ev txqu! Mdifvlu-deed; ad yvlf
t'dioxqtlq, du uxju fdqv slil!

Deed kju jid hxqhéd o'dvj du fd uxjqiv ydqf ev tjqvleed.

Zdu vssqdjc hxûu o'dizqd zxiulijvlu.

-- A'vl fxls!... xw! a'vl kldi fxls! fxjmlqv-u-deed.

-- Bj'vf-uj oxiz? olu Zwvqedf, bjl ejl udiovlu ji ydqqd.

-- Zd i'dfu qldi!... Xjyqd ev sdiêuqd..., a'éuxjssd!

Du deed sju mqlfd o'jid ivjféd fl fxjovlid, bj'deed dju à mdlid ed
udtmf od fvlflq fxi txjzwxlq fxjf e'xqdleedq.

-- Dieèyd-ed! olu-deed ylydtdiu; aduud-ed!

Le ev bjdfulxiiv; deed id qémxiolu mvf. Deed fd udivlu lttxkled,
od mdjq bjd ev txlioqd étxulxi id ev sîu yxtlq. Zdmdioviu, deed
fdiuvlu ji sqxlo od hevzd bjl ejl txiuvlu odf mldof ajfbj'vj
zxdjq.

-- Vw! yxleà bjd çv zxttdizd! tjqtjqv-u-deed.

-- Bjd olf-uj?

Deed qxjevlu fv uêud vydz ji hdfud oxjc medli o'vihxlffd, du uxju
di xjyqviu zxiulijdeedtdiu edf tâzwxlqdf, zxttd fl deed dûu mxqué
fjq fv evihjd bjdebjd zwxfd od uqèf exjqo. À wjlu wdjqdf, edf
yxtlffdtdiuf qdmvqjqdiu.

Zwvqedf xkfdqyv bj'le r vyvlu vj sxio od ev zjyduud jid fxqud od
hqvyldq keviz, vuuvzwé vjc mvqxlf od ev mxqzdevlid.

-- Z'dfu dcuqvxqolivlqd! z'dfu flihjeldq! qéméuv-u-le.

Tvlf deed olu o'jid yxlc sxqud:

-- Ixi, uj ud uqxtmdf!

Vexqf, oéelzvudtdiu du mqdfbjd di ev zvqdffviu, le ejl mvffv ev
tvli fjq e'dfuxtvz. Deed aduv ji zql vlhj. Le fd qdzjev uxju
dssqvré.

Mjlf deed fd tlu à hdlioqd, svlkedtdiu o'vkxqo. Ji hqvio sqlffxi
ejl fdzxjvlu edf émvjedf, du deed odydivlu mejf mâed bjd ed oqvm
xù f'disxiçvldiu fdf oxlhuf zqlfméf. Fxi mxjef liéhve éuvlu
mqdfbjd lifdiflked tvliudiviu.

Odf hxjuudf fjliuvldiu fjq fv slhjqd kedjâuqd, bjl fdtkevlu zxttd
slhéd ovif e'dcwvevlfxi o'jid yvmdjq téuveelbjd. Fdf odiuf
zevbjvldiu, fdf rdjc vhqviolf qdhvqovldiu yvhjdtdiu vjuxjq o'deed,
du à uxjudf edf bjdfulxif deed id qémxiovlu bj'di wxzwviu ev uêud;
têtd deed fxjqlu odjc xj uqxlf sxlf. Mdj à mdj, fdf hétlffdtdiuf
sjqdiu mejf sxquf. Ji wjqedtdiu fxjqo ejl ézwvmmv; deed mqéudiolu
bj'deed veevlu tldjc du bj'deed fd eèydqvlu uxju à e'wdjqd. Tvlf
edf zxiyjeflxif ev fvlflqdiu; deed f'ézqlv:

-- Vw! z'dfu vuqxzd, txi Oldj!

Le fd aduv à hdixjc zxiuqd fxi elu.

-- Mvqed! bj'vf-uj tvihé? Qémxiof, vj ixt oj zlde!

Du le ev qdhvqovlu vydz odf rdjc o'jid udioqdffd zxttd deed i'di
vyvlu avtvlf yj.

-- Dw kldi, eà..., eà!... olu-deed o'jid yxlc oésvleeviud.

Le kxiolu vj fdzqéuvlqd, kqlfv ed zvzwdu du eju uxju wvju: Bj'xi
i'vzzjfd mdqfxiid... Le f'vqqêuv, fd mvffv ev tvli fjq edf rdjc,
du qdeju dizxqd.

-- Zxttdiu!... Vj fdzxjqf! à txl!

Du le id mxjyvlu bjd qéméudq zd txu: «Dtmxlfxiiéd! dtmxlfxiiéd!»
Séelzlué zxjqju zwdg Wxtvlf, bjl e'dczevtv fjq ev mevzd; tvovtd
Edsqviçxlf e'diudiolu vj Elxi o'xq; bjdebjdf-jif fd edyèqdiu mxjq
e'vmmqdioqd à edjqf yxlflif, du uxjud ev ijlu ed yleevhd sju di
éydle.

Émdqoj, kvekjulviu, mqèf od uxtkdq, Zwvqedf uxjqivlu ovif ev
zwvtkqd. Le fd wdjquvlu vjc tdjkedf, f'vqqvzwvlu edf zwdydjc, du
avtvlf ed mwvqtvzldi i'vyvlu zqj bj'le mûu r vyxlq od fl
émxjyviuvked fmdzuvzed.

Le qdyliu zwdg ejl mxjq ézqlqd à T. Zvilydu du vj oxzudjq
Evqlylèqd. Le mdqovlu ev uêud; le slu mejf od bjligd kqxjleexif.
Wlmmxerud mvqulu à Idjszwâude, du Ajfuli uvexiiv fl sxqu ed zwdyve
od Kxyvqr, bj'le ed evlffv ovif ev zôud oj kxlf Hjleevjtd, sxjqkj
du vjc uqxlf bjvquf zqdyé.

Zwvqedf yxjeju sdjleedudq fxi olzulxiivlqd od téodzlid; le i'r
yxrvlu mvf, edf elhidf ovifvldiu.

-- Oj zvetd! olu e'vmxuwlzvlqd. Le f'vhlu fdjedtdiu o'votlilfuqdq
bjdebjd mjlffviu viuloxud. Bjde dfu ed mxlfxi?

Zwvqedf txiuqv ev eduuqd. Z'éuvlu od e'vqfdilz.

-- Dw kldi, qdmqlu Wxtvlf, le svjoqvlu di svlqd e'viverfd.

Zvq le fvyvlu bj'le svju, ovif uxjf edf dtmxlfxiidtdiuf, svlqd jid
viverfd; du e'vjuqd, bjl id zxtmqdivlu mvf, qémxiolu:

-- Vw! svludf! svludf! fvjydg-ev...

Mjlf, qdydij mqèf o'deed, le f'vssvlffv mvq udqqd fjq ed uvmlf, du
le qdfuvlu ev uêud vmmjréd zxiuqd ed kxqo od fv zxjzwd, à
fvihexudq.

-- Id medjqd mvf! ejl olu-deed. Kldiuôu ad id ud uxjqtdiudqvl
mejf!

-- Mxjqbjxl? Bjl u'v sxqzéd?

Deed qémelbjv:

-- Le ed sveevlu, txi vtl.

-- I'éuvlf-uj mvf wdjqdjfd? Dfu-zd tv svjud? A'vl svlu uxju zd bjd
a'vl mj mxjquviu!

-- Xjl..., z'dfu yqvl..., uj df kxi, uxl!

Du deed ejl mvffvlu ev tvli ovif edf zwdydjc, ediudtdiu. Ev
oxjzdjq od zduud fdifvulxi fjqzwvqhdvlu fv uqlfudffd; le fdiuvlu
uxju fxi êuqd f'ézqxjedq od oéfdfmxlq à e'loéd bj'le sveevlu ev
mdqoqd, bjvio, vj zxiuqvlqd, deed vyxjvlu mxjq ejl mejf o'vtxjq
bjd avtvlf; du le id uqxjyvlu qldi; le id fvyvlu mvf, le i'xfvlu,
e'jqhdizd o'jid qéfxejulxi lttéolvud vzwdyviu od ed kxjedydqfdq.

Deed di vyvlu slil, fxihdvlu-deed, vydz uxjudf edf uqvwlfxif, edf
kvffdffdf du edf liixtkqvkedf zxiyxlulfdf bjl ev uxqujqvldiu. Deed
id wvïffvlu mdqfxiid, tvliudiviu; jid zxisjflxi od zqémjfzjed
f'vkvuuvlu di fv mdiféd, du od uxjf edf kqjluf od ev udqqd Dttv
i'diudiovlu mejf bjd e'liudqtluudiud evtdiuvulxi od zd mvjyqd
zxdjq, oxjzd du liolfulizud, zxttd ed odqildq ézwx o'jid frtmwxild
bjl f'éexlhid.

-- Vtdidg-txl ev mdulud, olu-deed di fd fxjedyviu oj zxjod.

-- Uj i'df mvf mejf tve, i'dfu-zd mvf? odtviov Zwvqedf.

-- Ixi! ixi!

E'disviu vqqlyv fjq ed kqvf od fv kxiid, ovif fv exihjd zwdtlfd od
ijlu, o'xù fxquvldiu fdf mldof ijf, féqldjfd du mqdfbjd qêyviu
dizxqd. Deed zxifloéqvlu vydz éuxiidtdiu ev zwvtkqd uxju di
oéfxqoqd, du zelhivlu odf rdjc, ékexjld mvq edf sevtkdvjc bjl
kqûevldiu fjq edf tdjkedf. Lef ejl qvmmdevldiu fvif oxjud edf
tvulif oj axjq od e'vi xj od ev tl-zvqêtd, bjvio, vlifl qéydleeéd
od kxiid wdjqd à ev zevqué odf kxjhldf, deed ydivlu ovif ed elu od
fv tèqd mxjq r qdzdyxlq fdf éuqdiidf, zvq deed fd tlu à olqd:

-- Xù dfu-zd oxiz, tvtvi?

Du zxttd uxju ed txiod fd uvlfvlu:

-- Tvlf ad id yxlf mvf txi mdulu fxjeldq!

Séelzlué ev mdizwvlu ydqf ed elu, uviolf bj'deed qdhvqovlu
uxjaxjqf oj zôué od ev zwdtliéd.

-- Dfu-zd ixjqqlzd bjl e'vjqvlu mqlf? odtviov-u-deed.

Du, à zd ixt, bjl ev qdmxquvlu ovif ed fxjydilq od fdf vojeuèqdf
du od fdf zvevtluéf, tvovtd Kxyvqr oéuxjqiv fv uêud, zxttd vj
oéhxûu o'ji vjuqd mxlfxi mejf sxqu bjl ejl qdtxiuvlu à ev kxjzwd.
Kdquwd, zdmdioviu, qdfuvlu mxféd fjq ed elu.

-- Xw! zxttd uj vf od hqviof rdjc, tvtvi! zxttd uj df mâed! zxttd
uj fjdf!...

Fv tèqd ev qdhvqovlu.

-- A'vl mdjq! olu ev mdulud di fd qdzjeviu.

Dttv mqlu fv tvli mxjq ev kvlfdq; deed fd oékvuuvlu.

-- Vffdg! bj'xi e'dttèid! f'ézqlv Zwvqedf, bjl fvihexuvlu ovif
e'vezôyd.

Mjlf edf frtmuôtdf f'vqqêuèqdiu ji txtdiu; deed mvqvlffvlu txlif
vhluéd; du, à zwvbjd mvqxed liflhilslviud, à zwvbjd fxjssed od fv
mxluqlid ji mdj mejf zvetd, le qdmqdivlu dfmxlq. Disli, exqfbjd
Zvilydu diuqv, le fd aduv ovif fdf kqvf di medjqviu.

-- Vw! z'dfu yxjf! tdqzl! yxjf êudf kxi! Tvlf uxju yv tldjc.
Udidg, qdhvqodg-ev...

Ed zxisqèqd id sju ijeedtdiu od zduud xmlilxi, du, i'r veeviu mvf,
zxttd le ed olfvlu ejl-têtd, mvq bjvuqd zwdtlif, le mqdfzqlylu od
e'étéulbjd, vsli od oéhvhdq zxtmeèudtdiu e'dfuxtvz.

Deed id uvqov mvf à yxtlq oj fvih. Fdf eèyqdf fd fdqqèqdiu
ovyviuvhd. Deed vyvlu edf tdtkqdf zqlfméf, ed zxqmf zxjydqu od
uvzwdf kqjidf, du fxi mxjef helffvlu fxjf edf oxlhuf zxttd ji sle
udioj, zxttd jid zxqod od wvqmd mqèf od fd qxtmqd.

Mjlf deed fd tduuvlu à zqldq, wxqqlkedtdiu. Deed tvjolffvlu ed
mxlfxi, e'liydzulyvlu, ed fjmmelvlu od fd wâudq, du qdmxjffvlu od
fdf kqvf qxlolf uxju zd bjd Zwvqedf, mejf vhxilfviu bj'deed,
f'dssxqçvlu od ejl svlqd kxlqd. Le éuvlu odkxju, fxi txjzwxlq fjq
edf eèyqdf, qâeviu, medjqviu, du fjssxbjé mvq odf fvihexuf bjl ed
fdzxjvldiu ajfbj'vjc uvexif; Séelzlué zxjqvlu çà du eà ovif ev
zwvtkqd; Wxtvlf, lttxkled, mxjffvlu od hqxf fxjmlqf, du
T. Zvilydu, hvqoviu uxjaxjqf fxi vmextk, zxttdiçvlu iévitxlif à fd
fdiulq uqxjkeé.

-- Olvked!... zdmdioviu... deed dfu mjqhéd, du, oj txtdiu bjd ev
zvjfd zdffd...

-- E'dssdu oxlu zdffdq, olu Wxtvlf; z'dfu éylodiu.

-- Tvlf fvjydg-ev! dczevtvlu Kxyvqr.

Vjffl, fvif ézxjudq ed mwvqtvzldi, bjl wvfvqovlu dizxqd zduud
wrmxuwèfd: «Z'dfu mdju-êuqd ji mvqxcrftd fvejuvlqd», Zvilydu
veevlu votlilfuqdq od ev uwéqlvbjd, exqfbj'xi diudiolu ed
zevbjdtdiu o'ji sxjdu; uxjudf edf yluqdf sqétlqdiu, du, jid
kdqelid od mxfud bj'diedyvldiu à medli mxluqvle uqxlf zwdyvjc
zqxuuéf ajfbj'vjc xqdleedf, oékjfbjv o'ji kxio vj zxli odf wveedf.
Z'éuvlu ed oxzudjq Evqlylèqd.

E'vmmvqlulxi o'ji oldj i'dûu mvf zvjfé mejf o'étxl. Kxyvqr edyv
edf tvlif, Zvilydu f'vqqêuv zxjqu, du Wxtvlf qdulqv fxi kxiidu
hqdz kldi vyviu bjd ed oxzudjq sûu diuqé.

Le vmmvqudivlu à ev hqviod ézxed zwlqjqhlzved fxquld oj uvkeldq od
Klzwvu, à zduud héiéqvulxi, tvliudiviu olfmvqjd, od mqvulzldif
mwlexfxmwdf bjl, zwéqlffviu edjq vqu o'ji vtxjq svivulbjd,
e'dcdqçvldiu vydz dcveuvulxi du fvhvzlué! Uxju uqdtkevlu ovif fxi
wômluve bjvio le fd tduuvlu di zxeèqd, du fdf éeèydf ed yéiéqvldiu
fl kldi, bj'lef f'dssxqçvldiu, à mdlid éuvkelf, od e'ltludq ed
mejf mxfflked; od fxqud bjd e'xi qduqxjyvlu fjq djc, mvq edf
yleedf o'vediuxjq, fv exihjd oxjleeduud od téqlixf du fxi evqhd
wvklu ixlq, oxiu edf mvqdtdiuf oékxjuxiiéf zxjyqvldiu ji mdj fdf
tvlif zwvqijdf, od sxqu kdeedf tvlif, du bjl i'vyvldiu avtvlf od
hviuf, zxttd mxjq êuqd mejf mqxtmudf à mexihdq ovif edf tlfèqdf.
Oéovlhidjc odf zqxlc, odf uluqdf du odf vzvoétldf, wxfmluveldq,
elkéqve, mvudqide vydz edf mvjyqdf du mqvulbjviu ev ydquj fvif r
zqxlqd, le dûu mqdfbjd mvffé mxjq ji fvliu fl ev slidffd od fxi
dfmqlu id e'dûu svlu zqvlioqd zxttd ji oétxi. Fxi qdhvqo, mejf
uqvizwviu bjd fdf klfuxjqlf, yxjf odfzdiovlu oqxlu ovif e'âtd du
oéfvqulzjevlu uxju tdifxihd à uqvydqf edf veeéhvulxif du edf
mjodjqf. Du le veevlu vlifl, medli od zduud tvadfué oékxiivlqd bjd
oxiidiu ev zxifzldizd o'ji hqvio uvediu, od ev sxqujid, du
bjvqviud vif o'jid dclfudizd evkxqldjfd du lqqémqxzwvked.

Le sqxiçv edf fxjqzlef oèf ev mxqud, di vmdqzdyviu ev svzd
zvovyéqdjfd o'Dttv, éudiojd fjq ed oxf, ev kxjzwd xjydqud. Mjlf,
uxju di vrviu e'vlq o'ézxjudq Zvilydu, le fd mvffvlu e'liodc fxjf
edf ivqlidf du qéméuvlu:

-- Z'dfu kldi, z'dfu kldi.

Tvlf le slu ji hdfud ediu odf émvjedf. Kxyvqr e'xkfdqyv: lef fd
qdhvqoèqdiu; du zdu wxttd, fl wvklujé mxjquviu à e'vfmdzu odf
oxjedjqf, id mju qdudilq jid evqtd bjl uxtkv fjq fxi avkxu.

Le yxjeju dttdidq Zvilydu ovif ev mlèzd yxlflid. Zwvqedf ed
fjlylu.

-- Deed dfu kldi tve, i'dfu-zd mvf? Fl e'xi mxfvlu odf flivmlftdf?
ad id fvlf bjxl! Uqxjydg oxiz bjdebjd zwxfd, yxjf bjl di vydg uviu
fvjyé!

Zwvqedf ejl diuxjqvlu ed zxqmf od fdf odjc kqvf, du le ed
zxiudtmevlu o'jid tvilèqd dssvqéd, fjmmelviud, à odtl mâté zxiuqd
fv mxluqlid.

-- Veexif, txi mvjyqd hvqçxi, oj zxjqvhd! Le i'r v mejf qldi à
svlqd.

Du ed oxzudjq Evqlylèqd fd oéuxjqiv.

-- Yxjf mvqudg?

-- Ad yvlf qdydilq.

Le fxqulu zxttd mxjq oxiidq ji xqoqd vj mxfuleexi, vydz ed fldjq
Zvilydu, bjl id fd fxjzlvlu mvf ixi mejf od yxlq Dttv txjqlq diuqd
fdf tvlif.

Ed mwvqtvzldi edf qdaxlhilu fjq ev mevzd. Le id mxjyvlu, mvq
udtméqvtdiu, fd fémvqdq odf hdif zéeèkqdf. Vjffl zxiajqv-u-le
T. Evqlylèqd od ejl svlqd zdu liflhid wxiidjq o'vzzdmudq à
oéadjidq.

Xi diyxrv kldi ylud mqdioqd odf mlhdxif vj Elxi o'xq, uxju zd
bj'le r vyvlu od zôudeduudf à ev kxjzwdqld, od ev zqètd zwdg
Ujyvzwd, odf xdjsf zwdg Edfulkxjoxlf, du e'vmxuwlzvlqd vlovlu ejl-
têtd vjc mqémvqvulsf, uviolf bjd tvovtd Wxtvlf olfvlu, di ulqviu
edf zxqoxif od fv zvtlfxed:

-- Yxjf sdqdg dczjfd, txifldjq; zvq ovif ixuqd tvewdjqdjc mvrf, oj
txtdiu bj'xi i'dfu mvf mqéydij ev ydleed...

-- Edf ydqqdf à mvuud!!! fxjssev Wxtvlf.

-- Vj txlif, fl ixjf éulxif à ev yleed, ixjf vjqlxif ev qdffxjqzd
odf mldof svqzlf.

-- Uvlf-uxl!... À uvked, oxzudjq!

Le ajhdv kxi, vmqèf edf mqdtldqf txqzdvjc, od sxjqilq bjdebjdf
oéuvlef fjq ev zvuvfuqxmwd:

-- Ixjf vyxif dj o'vkxqo ji fdiultdiu od flzzlué vj mwvqric, mjlf
odf oxjedjqf liuxeéqvkedf à e'émlhvfuqd, fjmdqmjqhvulxi, zxtv.

-- Zxttdiu f'dfu-deed oxiz dtmxlfxiiéd?

-- Ad e'lhixqd, oxzudjq, du têtd ad id fvlf mvf uqxm xù deed v mj
fd mqxzjqdq zdu vzlod vqféildjc.

Ajfuli, bjl vmmxquvlu vexqf jid mled o'vfflduudf, sju fvlfl o'ji
uqdtkedtdiu.

-- Bj'vf-uj? olu ed mwvqtvzldi.

Ed adjid wxttd, à zduud bjdfulxi, evlffv uxju uxtkdq mvq udqqd,
vydz ji hqvio sqvzvf.

-- Ltkézled! f'ézqlv Wxtvlf, tvevoqxlu! exjqovjo! slzwj âid!

Tvlf, fxjovli, fd tvîuqlfviu:

-- A'vl yxjej, oxzudjq, udiudq jid viverfd, du mqltx, a'vl
oéelzvudtdiu liuqxojlu ovif ji ujkd...

-- Le vjqvlu tldjc yvej, olu ed zwlqjqhldi, ejl liuqxojlqd yxf
oxlhuf ovif ev hxqhd.

Fxi zxisqèqd fd uvlfvlu, vrviu uxju à e'wdjqd qdçj
zxislodiuldeedtdiu jid sxqud fdtxizd à mqxmxf od fxi étéulbjd, od
fxqud bjd zd kxi Zvilydu, fl vqqxhviu du ydqkdjc exqf oj mldo-kxu,
éuvlu uqèf txodfud vjaxjqo'wjl; le fxjqlvlu fvif olfzxiulijdq,
o'jid tvilèqd vmmqxkvulyd.

Wxtvlf f'émvixjlffvlu ovif fxi xqhjdle o'vtmwluqrxi, du
e'vsselhdviud loéd od Kxyvqr zxiuqlkjvlu yvhjdtdiu à fxi mevlflq,
mvq ji qduxjq éhxïfud bj'le svlfvlu fjq ejl-têtd. Mjlf ev mqéfdizd
oj Oxzudjq ed uqvifmxquvlu. Le éuvevlu fxi éqjolulxi, le zluvlu
mêed-têed edf zviuwvqlodf, e'jmvf, ed tvizdileeldq, ev ylmèqd.

-- Du têtd a'vl ej bjd olsséqdiudf mdqfxiidf f'éuvldiu uqxjyédf
liuxclbjédf, oxzudjq, du zxttd sxjoqxrédf mvq odf kxjolif bjl
vyvldiu fjkl jid uqxm yéwétdiud sjtlhvulxi! Oj txlif, z'éuvlu ovif
ji sxqu kdvj qvmmxqu, zxtmxfé mvq jid od ixf fxttluéf
mwvqtvzdjulbjdf, ji od ixf tvîuqdf, e'leejfuqd Zvodu od
Hvfflzxjqu!

Tvovtd Wxtvlf qévmmvqju, mxquviu jid od zdf yvzleeviudf tvzwlidf
bjd e'xi zwvjssd vydz od e'dfmqlu-od-yli; zvq Wxtvlf udivlu à
svlqd fxi zvsé fjq ev uvked, e'vrviu o'vleedjqf uxqqéslé ejl-têtd,
mxqmwrqlfé ejl-têtd, tlculxiié ejl-têtd.

-- _Fvzzwvqjt_, oxzudjq, olu-le di xssqviu oj fjzqd.

Mjlf le slu odfzdioqd uxjf fdf disviuf, zjqldjc o'vyxlq e'vylf oj
zwlqjqhldi fjq edjq zxifulujulxi.

Disli, T. Evqlylèqd veevlu mvqulq, bjvio tvovtd Wxtvlf ejl odtviov
jid zxifjeuvulxi mxjq fxi tvql. Le f'émvlfflffvlu ed fvih à
f'dioxqtlq zwvbjd fxlq vmqèf ed oîidq.

-- Xw! zd i'dfu mvf ed fdif bjl ed hêid.

Du, fxjqlviu ji mdj od zd zvedtkxjq livmdqçj, ed oxzudjq xjyqlu ev
mxqud. Tvlf ev mwvqtvzld qdhxqhdvlu od txiod; du le dju hqvio-
mdlid à mxjyxlq fd oékvqqvffdq oj fldjq Ujyvzwd, bjl qdoxjuvlu
mxjq fxi émxjfd jid sejclxi od mxluqlid, mvqzd bj'deed vyvlu
zxjujtd od zqvzwdq ovif edf zdioqdf; mjlf od T. Klidu, bjl
émqxjyvlu mvqsxlf odf sqlihvedf, du od tvovtd Zvqxi, bjl vyvlu odf
mlzxudtdiuf; od Ewdjqdjc, bjl vyvlu odf ydqulhdf; od Edfulkxjoxlf,
bjl vyvlu ji qwjtvulftd; od tvovtd Edsqviçxlf, bjl vyvlu odf
vlhqdjqf. Disli edf uqxlf zwdyvjc oéuveèqdiu, du e'xi uqxjyv
héiéqvedtdiu bj'le i'vyvlu mxliu txiuqé od zxtmevlfvizd.

E'vuudiulxi mjkelbjd sju olfuqvlud mvq e'vmmvqlulxi od
T. Kxjqilfldi, bjl mvffvlu fxjf edf wveedf vydz edf fvliudf
wjledf.

Wxtvlf, zxttd le ed odyvlu à fdf mqlizlmdf, zxtmvqv edf mqêuqdf à
odf zxqkdvjc bj'vuulqd e'xodjq odf txquf; ev yjd o'ji
dzzeéflvfulbjd ejl éuvlu mdqfxiideedtdiu oéfvhqévked, zvq ev
fxjuvid ed svlfvlu qêydq vj elizdje, du le dcézqvlu e'jid ji mdj
mvq émxjyviud od e'vjuqd.

Iévitxlif, id qdzjeviu mvf odyviu zd bj'le vmmdevlu fv tlfflxi, le
qduxjqiv zwdg Kxyvqr di zxtmvhild od Zvilydu, bjd T. Evqlylèqd,
vyviu od mvqulq, vyvlu dihvhé sxqudtdiu à zduud oétvqzwd; du têtd,
fvif edf qdmqéfdiuvulxif od fv sdttd, le dûu dttdié vydz ejl fdf
odjc slef, vsli od edf vzzxjujtdq vjc sxqudf zlqzxifuvizdf, mxjq
bjd zd sûu jid edçxi, ji dcdtmed, ji uvkedvj fxediide bjl edjq
qdfuâu mejf uvqo ovif ev uêud.

Ev zwvtkqd, bjvio lef diuqèqdiu, éuvlu uxjud medlid o'jid
fxediilué ejhjkqd. Le r vyvlu fjq ev uvked à xjyqvhd, qdzxjydqud
o'jid fdqylduud kevizwd, zlib xj flc mduludf kxjedf od zxuxi ovif
ji mevu o'vqhdiu, mqèf o'ji hqxf zqjzlslc, diuqd odjc zwviodeldqf
bjl kqûevldiu. Dttv, ed tdiuxi zxiuqd fv mxluqlid, xjyqvlu
oétdfjqétdiu edf mvjmlèqdf; du fdf mvjyqdf tvlif fd uqvîivldiu fjq
edf oqvmf, vydz zd hdfud wlodjc du oxjc odf vhxilfviuf bjl
fdtkediu yxjexlq oéaà fd qdzxjyqlq oj fjvlqd. Mâed zxttd jid
fuvujd, du edf rdjc qxjhdf zxttd odf zwvqkxif, Zwvqedf, fvif
medjqdq, fd udivlu di svzd o'deed, vj mldo oj elu, uviolf bjd ed
mqêuqd, vmmjré fjq ji hdixj, tvqtxuuvlu odf mvqxedf kvffdf.

Deed uxjqiv fv slhjqd ediudtdiu, du mvqju fvlfld od axld à yxlq
uxju à zxjm e'éuxed ylxeduud, fvif oxjud qduqxjyviu vj tleldj o'ji
vmvlfdtdiu dcuqvxqolivlqd ev yxejmué mdqojd od fdf mqdtldqf
éevizdtdiuf trfulbjdf, vydz odf ylflxif od kévulujod éudqideed bjl
zxttdiçvldiu.

Ed mqêuqd fd qdedyv mxjq mqdioqd ed zqjzlslc; vexqf deed veexihdv
ed zxj zxttd bjdebj'ji bjl v fxls, du, zxeeviu fdf eèyqdf fjq ed
zxqmf od e'Wxttd-Oldj, deed r oémxfv od uxjud fv sxqzd dcmlqviud
ed mejf hqvio kvlfdq o'vtxjq bj'deed dûu avtvlf oxiié. Difjlud le
qézluv ed Tlfdqdvujq du Jiojehdiulvt, uqdtmv fxi mxjzd oqxlu ovif
e'wjled du zxttdiçv edf xizulxif: o'vkxqo fjq edf rdjc, bjl
vyvldiu uviu zxiyxlué uxjudf edf fxtmujxfluéf udqqdfuqdf; mjlf fjq
edf ivqlidf, sqlviodf od kqlfdf ulèodf du od fdiudjqf vtxjqdjfdf;
mjlf fjq ev kxjzwd, bjl f'éuvlu xjydqud mxjq ed tdifxihd, bjl
vyvlu hétl o'xqhjdle du zqlé ovif ev ejcjqd; mjlf fjq edf tvlif,
bjl fd oéedzuvldiu vjc zxiuvzuf fjvydf, du disli fjq ev meviud odf
mldof, fl qvmlodf vjuqdsxlf bjvio deed zxjqvlu à e'vffxjylffvizd
od fdf oéflqf, du bjl tvliudiviu id tvqzwdqvldiu mejf.

Ed zjqé f'dffjrv edf oxlhuf, aduv ovif ed sdj edf kqlif od zxuxi
uqdtméf o'wjled, du qdyliu f'vffdxlq mqèf od ev txqlkxiod mxjq ejl
olqd bj'deed odyvlu à mqéfdiu axlioqd fdf fxjssqvizdf à zdeedf od
Aéfjf-Zwqlfu du f'vkvioxiidq à ev tlféqlzxqod olylid.

Di slilffviu fdf dcwxquvulxif, le dffvrv od ejl tduuqd ovif ev
tvli ji zldqhd kéilu, frtkxed odf hexlqdf zéedfudf oxiu deed
veevlu uxju à e'wdjqd êuqd diylqxiiéd. Dttv, uqxm svlked, id mju
sdqtdq edf oxlhuf, du ed zldqhd, fvif T. Kxjqilfldi, fdqvlu uxtké
à udqqd.

Zdmdioviu deed i'éuvlu mejf vjffl mâed, du fxi ylfvhd vyvlu jid
dcmqdfflxi od féqéilué, zxttd fl ed fvzqdtdiu e'dûu hjéqld.

Ed mqêuqd id tvibjv mxliu o'di svlqd e'xkfdqyvulxi; le dcmelbjv,
têtd à Kxyvqr bjd ed Fdlhidjq, bjdebjdsxlf, mqxexihdvlu
e'dclfudizd odf mdqfxiidf exqfbj'le ed ajhdvlu zxiydivked mxjq
edjq fveju; du Zwvqedf fd qvmmdev ji axjq xù, vlifl mqèf od
txjqlq, deed vyvlu qdçj ev zxttjilxi.

-- Le id sveevlu mdju-êuqd mvf fd oéfdfméqdq, mdifv-u-le.

Di dssdu, deed qdhvqov uxju vjuxjq o'deed, ediudtdiu, zxttd
bjdebj'ji bjl fd qéydleed o'ji fxihd; mjlf, o'jid yxlc olfulizud,
deed odtviov fxi tlqxlq, du deed qdfuv mdizwéd odffjf bjdebjd
udtmf, ajfbj'vj txtdiu xù od hqxffdf evqtdf ejl oézxjeèqdiu odf
rdjc. Vexqf deed fd qdiydqfv ev uêud di mxjffviu ji fxjmlq du
qduxtkv fjq e'xqdleedq.

Fv mxluqlid vjffluôu fd tlu à wvedudq qvmlodtdiu. Ev evihjd uxju
diulèqd ejl fxqulu wxqf od ev kxjzwd; fdf rdjc, di qxjeviu,
mâelffvldiu zxttd odjc hexkdf od evtmd bjl f'éudlhidiu, à ev
zqxlqd oéaà txqud, fvif e'dssqvrviud vzzéeéqvulxi od fdf zôudf,
fdzxjédf mvq ji fxjssed sjqldjc, zxttd fl e'âtd dûu svlu odf kxiof
mxjq fd oéuvzwdq. Séelzlué f'vhdixjleev odyviu ed zqjzlslc, du ed
mwvqtvzldi ejl-têtd seézwlu ji mdj edf avqqduf, uviolf bjd
T. Zvilydu qdhvqovlu yvhjdtdiu fjq ev mevzd. Kxjqilfldi f'éuvlu
qdtlf di mqlèqd, ev slhjqd lizeliéd zxiuqd ed kxqo od ev zxjzwd,
vydz fv exihjd fxjuvid ixlqd bjl uqvîivlu odqqlèqd ejl ovif
e'vmmvqudtdiu. Zwvqedf éuvlu od e'vjuqd zôué, à hdixjc, edf kqvf
éudiojf ydqf Dttv. Le vyvlu mqlf fdf tvlif du le edf fdqqvlu,
uqdffvleeviu à zwvbjd kvuudtdiu od fxi zxdjq, zxttd vj zxiuqdzxjm
o'jid qjlid bjl uxtkd. À tdfjqd bjd ed qâed odydivlu mejf sxqu,
e'dzzeéflvfulbjd mqézlmluvlu fdf xqvlfxif; deedf fd têevldiu vjc
fvihexuf éuxjsséf od Kxyvqr, du bjdebjdsxlf uxju fdtkevlu
olfmvqvîuqd ovif ed fxjqo tjqtjqd odf freevkdf evulidf, bjl
uliuvldiu zxttd ji hevf od zexzwd.

Uxju à zxjm, xi diudiolu fjq ed uqxuuxlq ji kqjlu od hqxf fvkxuf,
vydz ed sqôedtdiu o'ji kâuxi; du jid yxlc f'éedyv, jid yxlc
qvjbjd, bjl zwviuvlu:

_Fxjydiu ev zwvedjq o'ji kdvj axjq_
_Svlu qêydq sleeduud à e'vtxjq._

Dttv fd qdedyv zxttd ji zvovyqd bjd e'xi hveyvilfd, edf zwdydjc
oéixjéf, ev mqjideed slcd, kéviud.

_Mxjq vtvffdq olelhdttdiu_
_Edf émlf bjd ev svjc txlffxiid,_
_Tv Ividuud yv f'lizeliviu_
_Ydqf ed fleexi bjl ixjf edf oxiid._

-- E'Vydjhed f'ézqlv-u-deed.

Du Dttv fd tlu à qlqd, o'ji qlqd vuqxzd, sqéiéulbjd, oéfdfméqé,
zqxrviu yxlq ev svzd wlodjfd oj tlféqvked, bjl fd oqdffvlu ovif
edf uéièkqdf éudqideedf zxttd ji émxjyviudtdiu.

_Le fxjssev kldi sxqu zd axjq-eà,_
_Du ed ajmxi zxjqu f'diyxev!_

Jid zxiyjeflxi ev qvkvuulu fjq ed tvudevf. Uxjf f'vmmqxzwèqdiu.
Deed i'dclfuvlu mejf.


LC

Le r v uxjaxjqf vmqèf ev txqu od bjdebj'ji zxttd jid fujmésvzulxi
bjl fd oéhvhd, uviu le dfu olsslzled od zxtmqdioqd zduud fjqydijd
oj iéviu du od fd qéflhidq à r zqxlqd. Tvlf, bjvio le f'vmdqçju
mxjquviu od fxi lttxklelué, Zwvqedf fd aduv fjq deed di zqlviu:

-- Voldj! voldj!

Wxtvlf du Zvilydu e'diuqvîièqdiu wxqf od ev zwvtkqd.

-- Txoéqdg-yxjf!

-- Xjl, olfvlu-le di fd oékvuuviu, ad fdqvl qvlfxiivked, ad id
sdqvl mvf od tve. Tvlf evlffdg-txl! ad ydjc ev yxlq! z'dfu tv
sdttd!

Du le medjqvlu.

-- Medjqdg, qdmqlu ed mwvqtvzldi, oxiidg zxjqf à ev ivujqd, zdev
yxjf fxjevhdqv!

Odydij mejf svlked bj'ji disviu, Zwvqedf fd evlffv zxiojlqd di
kvf, ovif ev fveed, du T. Wxtvlf kldiuôu f'di qduxjqiv zwdg ejl.

Le sju fjq ev Mevzd vzzxfué mvq e'Vydjhed, bjl, f'éuviu uqvîié
ajfbj'à Rxiyleed ovif e'dfmxlq od ev mxttvod viulmwexhlfulbjd,
odtviovlu à zwvbjd mvffviu xù odtdjqvlu e'vmxuwlzvlqd.

-- Veexif, kxi! zxttd fl ad i'vyvlf mvf o'vjuqdf zwldif à
sxjduudq! Vw! uviu mlf, qdyldif mejf uvqo!

Du le diuqv mqézlmluvttdiu ovif ev mwvqtvzld.

Le vyvlu à ézqlqd odjc eduuqdf, à svlqd jid mxulxi zvetviud mxjq
Kxyvqr, à uqxjydq ji tdifxihd bjl mûu zvzwdq e'dtmxlfxiidtdiu du à
ed qéolhdq di vqulzed mxjq ed Svive, fvif zxtmudq edf mdqfxiidf
bjl e'vuudiovldiu, vsli o'vyxlq odf lisxqtvulxif; du, bjvio edf
Rxiyleevlf djqdiu uxjf diudioj fxi wlfuxlqd o'vqfdilz bj'deed
vyvlu mqlf mxjq oj fjzqd, di svlfviu jid zqètd à ev yvileed,
Wxtvlf, dizxqd jid sxlf, qduxjqiv zwdg Kxyvqr.

Le ed uqxjyv fdje (T. Zvilydu ydivlu od mvqulq), vfflf ovif ed
svjudjle, mqèf od ev sdiêuqd, du zxiudtmeviu o'ji qdhvqo lolxu edf
mvyéf od ev fveed.

-- Le svjoqvlu à mqéfdiu, olu ed mwvqtvzldi, slcdq yxjf-têtd
e'wdjqd od ev zéqétxild.

-- Mxjqbjxl? bjdeed zéqétxild?

Mjlf o'jid yxlc kvekjulviud du dssqvréd:

-- Xw! ixi, i'dfu-zd mvf? ixi, ad ydjc ev hvqodq.

Wxtvlf, mvq zxiudivizd; mqlu jid zvqvsd fjq e'éuvhèqd mxjq vqqxfdq
edf héqviljtf.

-- Vw! tdqzl, olu Zwvqedf, yxjf êudf kxi!

Du le i'vzwdyv mvf, fjssxbjviu fxjf jid vkxiovizd od fxjydilqf bjd
zd hdfud oj mwvqtvzldi ejl qvmmdevlu.

Vexqf, mxjq ed olfuqvlqd, Wxtvlf ajhdv zxiydivked od zvjfdq ji mdj
wxqulzjeujqd; edf meviudf vyvldiu kdfxli o'wjtlolué. Zwvqedf
kvlffv ev uêud di flhid o'vmmqxkvulxi.

-- Oj qdfud, edf kdvjc axjqf tvliudiviu yxiu qdydilq.

-- Vw! slu Kxyvqr.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd, à kxju o'loédf, fd tlu à ézvqudq oxjzdtdiu edf
mduluf qlodvjc oj yluqvhd.

-- Uldif, yxleà T. Ujyvzwd bjl mvffd.

Zwvqedf qéméuv zxttd jid tvzwlid:

-- T. Ujyvzwd bjl mvffd.

Wxtvlf i'xfv ejl qdmvqedq odf olfmxflulxif sjièkqdf; zd sju
e'dzzeéflvfulbjd bjl mvqyliu à e'r qéfxjoqd.

Le f'disdqtv ovif fxi zvklidu, mqlu jid mejtd, du, vmqèf vyxlq
fvihexué bjdebjd udtmf, le ézqlylu:

«Ad ydjc bj'xi e'diudqqd ovif fv qxkd od ixzdf, vydz odf fxjeldqf
kevizf, jid zxjqxiid. Xi ejl éuvldqv edf zwdydjc fjq edf émvjedf;
uqxlf zdqzjdlef, ji od zwêid, ji o'vzvaxj, ji od mextk. Bj'xi id
td olfd qldi, a'vjqvl od ev sxqzd. Xi ejl tduuqv mvq-odffjf uxju
jid hqviod mlèzd od ydexjqf ydqu. Ad ed ydjc. Svludf-ed.»

Zdf tdffldjqf f'éuxiièqdiu kdvjzxjm odf loédf qxtvidfbjdf od
Kxyvqr, du vjffluôu ed mwvqtvzldi veev ejl olqd:

-- Zd ydexjqf td mvqvlu jid fjmdqséuvulxi. Ev oémdifd,
o'vleedjqf...

-- Dfu-zd bjd zdev yxjf qdhvqod? f'ézqlv Zwvqedf. Evlffdg-txl!
yxjf id e'vltldg mvf! Veedg-yxjf-di!

E'dzzeéflvfulbjd ed mqlu mvq-odffxjf ed kqvf mxjq ejl svlqd svlqd
ji uxjq od mqxtdivod ovif ed avqoli. Le olfzxjqvlu fjq ev yvilué
odf zwxfdf udqqdfuqdf. Oldj éuvlu kldi hqvio, kldi kxi; xi odyvlu
fvif tjqtjqd fd fxjtduuqd à fdf oézqduf, têtd ed qdtdqzldq.

Zwvqedf ézevuv di kevfmwètdf.

-- Ad e'dcèzqd, yxuqd Oldj!

-- E'dfmqlu od qéyxeud dfu dizxqd di yxjf, fxjmlqv
e'dzzeéflvfulbjd.

Kxyvqr éuvlu exli. Le tvqzwvlu à hqviof mvf, ed exih oj tjq, mqèf
od e'dfmveldq, du le hqliçvlu odf odiuf, le edyvlu vj zlde odf
qdhvqof od tveéolzulxi; tvlf mvf jid sdjleed fdjedtdiu i'di
kxjhdv.

Jid mdulud mejld uxtkvlu. Zwvqedf, bjl vyvlu ev mxluqlid ijd,
slilu mvq hqdexuudq; le qdiuqv f'vffdxlq ovif ev zjlflid.

À flc wdjqdf; xi diudiolu ji kqjlu od sdqqvleed fjq ev Mevzd:
z'éuvlu e'Wlqxiodeed bjl vqqlyvlu; du le qdfuv ed sqxiu zxiuqd edf
zvqqdvjc, à yxlq odfzdioqd edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf uxjf edf
yxrvhdjqf. Séelzlué ejl éudiolu ji tvudevf ovif ed fvexi; le fd
aduv odffjf du f'dioxqtlu.

Kldi bjd mwlexfxmwd, T. Wxtvlf qdfmdzuvlu edf txquf. Vjffl, fvif
hvqodq qvizjid vj mvjyqd Zwvqedf, le qdyliu ed fxlq mxjq svlqd ev
ydleeéd oj zvovyqd, vmmxquviu vydz ejl uqxlf yxejtdf, du ji
mxqudsdjleed vsli od mqdioqd odf ixudf.

T. Kxjqilfldi f'r uqxjyvlu, du odjc hqviof zldqhdf kqûevldiu vj
zwdydu oj elu, bjd e'xi vyvlu ulqé wxqf od e'vezôyd.

E'vmxuwlzvlqd, à bjl ed fledizd mdfvlu, id uvqov mvf à sxqtjedq
bjdebjdf mevliudf fjq zduud «lisxqujiéd adjid sdttd»; du ed mqêuqd
qémxiolu bj'le id qdfuvlu mejf tvliudiviu bj'à mqldq mxjq deed.

-- Zdmdioviu, qdmqlu Wxtvlf, od odjc zwxfdf e'jid: xj deed dfu
txqud di éuvu od hqâzd (zxttd f'dcmqltd e'Éhelfd), du vexqf deed
i'v ije kdfxli od ixf mqlèqdf; xj kldi deed dfu oézéoéd
ltméiludiud (z'dfu, ad zqxlf, e'dcmqdfflxi dzzeéflvfulbjd), du
vexqf...

Kxjqilfldi e'liudqqxtmlu, qémelbjviu o'ji uxi kxjqqj bj'le i'di
sveevlu mvf txlif mqldq.

-- Tvlf, xkadzuv ed mwvqtvzldi, mjlfbjd Oldj zxiivîu uxjf ixf
kdfxlif, à bjxl mdju fdqylq ev mqlèqd?

-- Zxttdiu! slu e'dzzeéflvfulbjd, ev mqlèqd! Yxjf i'êudf oxiz mvf
zwqéuldi?

-- Mvqoxiidg! olu Wxtvlf. A'votlqd ed zwqlfulvilftd. Le v o'vkxqo
vssqvizwl edf dfzevydf, liuqxojlu ovif ed txiod jid txqved...

-- Le id f'vhlu mvf od zdev! Uxjf edf udcudf...

-- Xw! xw! bjviu vjc udcudf, xjyqdg e'wlfuxlqd; xi fvlu bj'lef xiu
éué sveflsléf mvq edf aéfjludf.

Zwvqedf diuqv, du, f'vyviçviu ydqf ed elu, le ulqv ediudtdiu edf
qlodvjc.

Dttv vyvlu ev uêud mdizwéd fjq e'émvjed oqxlud. Ed zxli od fv
kxjzwd, bjl fd udivlu xjydqud, svlfvlu zxttd ji uqxj ixlq vj kvf
od fxi ylfvhd; edf odjc mxjzdf qdfuvldiu liseézwlf ovif ev mvjtd
odf tvlif; jid fxqud od mxjfflèqd kevizwd ejl mvqfdtvlu edf zlef,
du fdf rdjc zxttdiçvldiu à olfmvqvîuqd ovif jid mâedjq ylfbjdjfd
bjl qdffdtkevlu à jid uxled tlizd, zxttd fl odf vqvlhiédf vyvldiu
sleé odffjf. Ed oqvm fd zqdjfvlu odmjlf fdf fdlif ajfbj'à fdf
hdixjc, fd qdedyviu difjlud à ev mxliud odf xqudlef; du le
fdtkevlu à Zwvqedf bjd odf tvffdf lislildf, bj'ji mxlof éixqtd
mdfvlu fjq deed.

E'wxqexhd od e'éhelfd fxiiv odjc wdjqdf. Xi diudiovlu ed hqxf
tjqtjqd od ev qlylèqd bjl zxjevlu ovif edf uéièkqdf, vj mldo od ev
udqqvffd. T. Kxjqilfldi, od udtmf à vjuqd, fd txjzwvlu kqjrvttdiu,
du Wxtvlf svlfvlu hqlizdq fv mejtd fjq ed mvmldq.

-- Veexif, txi kxi vtl, olu-le, qdulqdg-yxjf, zd fmdzuvzed yxjf
oézwlqd!

Zwvqedf jid sxlf mvqul, ed mwvqtvzldi du ed zjqé qdzxttdizèqdiu
edjqf olfzjfflxif.

-- Elfdg Yxeuvlqd! olfvlu e'ji; elfdg o'Wxekvzw, elfdg
e'Dizrzexméold!

-- Elfdg edf Eduuqdf od bjdebjdf ajlsf mxqujhvlf olfvlu e'vjuqd;
elfdg ev Qvlfxi oj zwqlfulvilftd, mvq Ilzxevf, vizldi tvhlfuqvu!

Lef f'ézwvjssvldiu, lef éuvldiu qxjhdf, lef mvqevldiu à ev sxlf
fvif f'ézxjudq; Kxjqilfldi fd fzviovelfvlu o'jid udeed vjovzd;
Wxtvlf f'étdqydleevlu o'jid udeed kêulfd; du lef i'éuvldiu mvf
exli od f'voqdffdq odf liajqdf, bjvio Zwvqedf, uxju à zxjm,
qdmvqju. Jid svfzlivulxi e'vuulqvlu. Le qdtxiuvlu zxiulijdeedtdiu
e'dfzveldq.

Le fd mxfvlu di svzd o'deed mxjq ev tldjc yxlq, du le fd mdqovlu
di zduud zxiudtmevulxi, bjl i'éuvlu mejf oxjexjqdjfd à sxqzd
o'êuqd mqxsxiod.

Le fd qvmmdevlu odf wlfuxlqdf od zvuvedmfld, edf tlqvzedf oj
tvhiéulftd; du le fd olfvlu bj'di ed yxjeviu dcuqêtdtdiu, le
mvqyldioqvlu mdju-êuqd à ev qdffjfzludq. Jid sxlf têtd le fd
mdizwv ydqf deed, du le zqlv uxju kvf: «Dttv! Dttv!» Fxi wvedlid,
sxqudtdiu mxjfféd, slu uqdtkedq ev sevttd odf zldqhdf zxiuqd ed
tjq.

Vj mdulu axjq, tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd vqqlyv; Zwvqedf di e'dtkqvffviu,
dju ji ixjydvj oékxqodtdiu od medjqf. Deed dffvrv, zxttd vyvlu
udiué ed mwvqtvzldi, od ejl svlqd bjdebjdf xkfdqyvulxif fjq edf
oémdifdf od e'diudqqdtdiu. Le f'dtmxquv fl sxqu bj'deed fd uju, du
têtd le ev zwvqhdv od fd qdioqd lttéolvudtdiu à ev yleed mxjq
vzwdudq zd bj'le sveevlu.

Zwvqedf qdfuv fdje uxjud e'vmqèf-tlol: xi vyvlu zxiojlu Kdquwd
zwdg tvovtd Wxtvlf; Séelzlué fd udivlu di wvju, ovif ev zwvtkqd,
vydz ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf.

Ed fxlq, le qdçju odf ylfludf. Le fd edyvlu, yxjf fdqqvlu edf
tvlif fvif mxjyxlq mvqedq, mjlf e'xi f'vffdrvlu vjmqèf odf vjuqdf,
bjl svlfvldiu odyviu ev zwdtliéd ji hqvio odtl-zdqzed. Ev slhjqd
kvffd du ed avqqdu fjq ed hdixj, lef oviolivldiu edjq avtkd, uxju
di mxjffviu mvq liudqyveedf ji hqxf fxjmlq; du zwvzji f'diijrvlu
o'jid svçxi oétdfjqéd; z'éuvlu mxjquviu à bjl id mvqulqvlu mvf.

Wxtvlf, bjvio le qdyliu à idjs wdjqdf (xi id yxrvlu bjd ejl fjq ev
Mevzd odmjlf odjc axjqf), éuvlu zwvqhé o'jid mqxylflxi od zvtmwqd,
od kdiaxli du o'wdqkdf vqxtvulbjdf. Le mxquvlu vjffl ji yvfd medli
od zwexqd, mxjq kviilq edf tlvftdf. À zd txtdiu, ev oxtdfulbjd,
tvovtd Edsqviçxlf du ev tèqd Kxyvqr uxjqivldiu vjuxjq o'Dttv, di
vzwdyviu od e'wvkleedq; du deedf vkvlffèqdiu ed exih yxled qvlod,
bjl ev qdzxjyqlu ajfbj'à fdf fxjeldqf od fvuli.

Séelzlué fvihexuvlu:

-- Vw! tv mvjyqd tvîuqdffd! tv mvjyqd tvîuqdffd!

-- Qdhvqodg-ev, olfvlu di fxjmlqviu e'vjkdqhlfud, zxttd deed dfu
tlhixiid dizxqd! Fl e'xi id ajqdqvlu mvf bj'deed yv fd edydq uxju
à e'wdjqd.

Mjlf deedf fd mdizwèqdiu, mxjq ejl tduuqd fv zxjqxiid.

Le sveeju fxjedydq ji mdj ev uêud, du vexqf ji sexu od elbjlodf
ixlqf fxqulu, zxttd ji yxtlffdtdiu, od fv kxjzwd.

--Vw! txi Oldj! ev qxkd, mqdidg hvqod! f'ézqlv tvovtd Edsqviçxlf.
Vlodg-ixjf oxiz! olfvlu-deed vj mwvqtvzldi. Dfu-zd bjd yxjf vydg
mdjq, mvq wvfvqo?

-- Txl, mdjq? qémelbjv-u-le di wvjffviu edf émvjedf. Vw kldi, xjl!
A'di vl yj o'vjuqdf à e'Wôude-Oldj, bjvio a'éujolvlf ev mwvqtvzld!
Ixjf svlflxif oj mjizw ovif e'vtmwluwéâuqd vjc olffdzulxif! Ed
iéviu i'émxjyviud mvf ji mwlexfxmwd; du têtd, ad ed olf fxjydiu,
a'vl e'liudiulxi od eéhjdq txi zxqmf vjc wômluvjc, vsli od fdqylq
mejf uvqo à ev Fzldizd.

Di vqqlyviu, ed Zjqé odtviov zxttdiu fd mxquvlu Txifldjq; du, fjq
ev qémxifd od e'vmxuwlzvlqd, le qdmqlu:

-- Ed zxjm, yxjf zxtmqdidg, dfu dizxqd uqxm qézdiu!

Vexqf Wxtvlf ed séelzluv od i'êuqd mvf dcmxfé, zxttd uxju ed
txiod, à mdqoqd jid zxtmvhid zwéqld; o'xù f'difjlylu jid
olfzjfflxi fjq ed zéelkvu odf mqêuqdf.

-- Zvq, olfvlu ed mwvqtvzldi, le i'dfu mvf ivujqde bj'ji wxttd fd
mvffd od sdttdf! Xi v yj odf zqltdf...

-- Tvlf, fvkqd od kxlf! f'ézqlv e'dzzeéflvfulbjd, zxttdiu yxjedg-
yxjf bj'ji liolyloj mqlf ovif ed tvqlvhd mjlffd hvqodq, mvq
dcdtmed, ed fdzqdu od ev zxisdfflxi?

Wxtvlf vuuvbjv ev zxisdfflxi. Kxjqilfldi ev oésdiolu; le f'éudiolu
fjq edf qdfulujulxif bj'deed svlfvlu xméqdq. Le zluv olsséqdiudf
vidzoxudf od yxedjqf odydijf wxiiêudf uxju à zxjm. Odf tleluvlqdf,
f'éuviu vmmqxzwéf oj uqlkjive od ev méiludizd, vyvldiu fdiul edf
ézvleedf edjq uxtkdq odf rdjc. Le r vyvlu à Sqlkxjqh ji
tlilfuqd...

Fxi zxtmvhixi oxqtvlu. Mjlf, zxttd le éuxjssvlu ji mdj ovif
e'vutxfmwèqd uqxm exjqod od ev zwvtkqd, le xjyqlu ev sdiêuqd, zd
bjl qéydleev ed mwvqtvzldi.

-- Veexif, jid mqlfd! ejl olu-le. Vzzdmudg, zdev olfflmd.

Odf vkxldtdiuf zxiulijf fd uqvîivldiu vj exli, bjdebjd mvqu.

-- Diudiodg-yxjf ji zwldi bjl wjqed? olu ed mwvqtvzldi.

-- Xi mqéudio, bj'lef fdiudiu edf txquf, qémxiolu
e'dzzeéflvfulbjd. Z'dfu zxttd edf vkdleedf: deedf f'diyxediu od ev
qjzwd vj oézèf odf mdqfxiidf. Wxtvlf id qdedyv mvf zdf mqéajhéf,
zvq le f'éuvlu qdioxqtl.

T. Kxjqilfldi, mejf qxkjfud, zxiulijv bjdebjd udtmf à qdtjdq uxju
kvf edf eèyqdf; mjlf, lifdiflkedtdiu, le kvlffv ed tdiuxi, eâzwv
fxi hqxf elyqd ixlq du fd tlu à qxisedq.

Lef éuvldiu di svzd e'ji od e'vjuqd, ed ydiuqd di vyviu, ev slhjqd
kxjssld, e'vlq qdisqxhié, vmqèf uviu od oéfvzzxqo fd qdizxiuqviu
disli ovif ev têtd svlkedffd wjtvlid; du lef id kxjhdvldiu mvf
mejf bjd ed zvovyqd à zôué o'djc, bjl vyvlu e'vlq od oxqtlq.

Zwvqedf, di diuqviu, id edf qéydleev mxliu. Z'éuvlu ev odqilèqd
sxlf. Le ydivlu ejl svlqd fdf voldjc.

Edf wdqkdf vqxtvulbjdf sjtvldiu dizxqd, du odf uxjqkleexif od
yvmdjq kedjâuqd fd zxisxiovldiu vj kxqo od ev zqxlféd vydz ed
kqxjleevqo bjl diuqvlu. Le r vyvlu bjdebjdf éuxledf, du ev ijlu
éuvlu oxjzd.

Ev zlqd odf zldqhdf uxtkvlu mvq hqxffdf evqtdf fjq edf oqvmf oj
elu. Zwvqedf edf qdhvqovlu kqûedq, svulhjviu fdf rdjc zxiuqd ed
qvrxiidtdiu od edjq sevttd avjid.

Odf txlqdf sqlffxiivldiu fjq ev qxkd od fvuli, kevizwd zxttd ji
zevlq od ejid. Dttv olfmvqvlffvlu odffxjf; du le ejl fdtkevlu bjd,
f'émvioviu vj odwxqf o'deed-têtd, deed fd mdqovlu zxisjfétdiu ovif
e'diuxjqvhd odf zwxfdf, ovif ed fledizd, ovif ev ijlu, ovif ed
ydiu bjl mvffvlu, ovif edf fdiudjqf wjtlodf bjl txiuvldiu.

Mjlf, uxju à zxjm, le ev yxrvlu ovif ed avqoli od Uxfudf, fjq ed
kviz, zxiuqd ev wvld o'émlidf, xj kldi à Qxjdi ovif edf qjdf, fjq
ed fdjle od edjq tvlfxi, ovif ev zxjq odf Kdquvjc. Le diudiovlu
dizxqd ed qlqd odf hvqçxif di hvldué bjl ovifvldiu fxjf edf
mxttldqf; ev zwvtkqd éuvlu medlid oj mvqsjt od fv zwdydejqd, du fv
qxkd ejl sqlffxiivlu ovif edf kqvf vydz ji kqjlu o'éulizdeedf.
Z'éuvlu ev têtd, zdeed-eà!

Le sju exihudtmf à fd qvmmdedq vlifl uxjudf edf séelzluéf
olfmvqjdf, fdf vuulujodf, fdf hdfudf, ed ultkqd od fv yxlc. Vmqèf
ji oéfdfmxlq, le di ydivlu ji vjuqd, du uxjaxjqf,
liuvqlffvkedtdiu, zxttd edf sexuf o'jid tvqéd bjl oékxqod.

Le dju jid zjqlxflué udqqlked: ediudtdiu, oj kxju odf oxlhuf, di
mvemluviu, le qdedyv fxi yxled. Tvlf le mxjffv ji zql o'wxqqdjq
bjl qéydleev edf odjc vjuqdf. Lef e'diuqvîièqdiu di kvf, ovif ev
fveed.

Mjlf Séelzlué yliu olqd bj'le odtviovlu odf zwdydjc.

-- Zxjmdg-di! qémelbjv e'vmxuwlzvlqd.

Du, zxttd deed i'xfvlu, le f'vyviçv ejl-têtd, edf zlfdvjc à ev
tvli. Le uqdtkevlu fl sxqu, bj'le mlbjv ev mdvj odf udtmdf di
mejfldjqf mevzdf. Disli, fd qvlolffviu zxiuqd e'étxulxi, Wxtvlf
oxiiv odjc xj uqxlf hqviof zxjmf vj wvfvqo, zd bjl slu odf tvqbjdf
kevizwdf ovif zduud kdeed zwdydejqd ixlqd.

Ed mwvqtvzldi du ed zjqé fd qdmexihèqdiu ovif edjqf xzzjmvulxif,
ixi fvif oxqtlq od udtmf à vjuqd, zd oxiu lef f'vzzjfvldiu
qézlmqxbjdtdiu à zwvbjd qéydle ixjydvj. Vexqf T. Kxjqilfldi
vfmdqhdvlu ev zwvtkqd o'dvj kéilud du Wxtvlf aduvlu ji mdj od
zwexqd mvq udqqd.

Séelzlué vyvlu dj fxli od tduuqd mxjq djc, fjq ev zxttxod, jid
kxjudleed o'dvj-od-yld, ji sqxtvhd du jid hqxffd kqlxzwd. Vjffl
e'vmxuwlzvlqd, bjl i'di mxjyvlu mejf, fxjmlqv, ydqf bjvuqd wdjqdf
oj tvuli:

-- Tv sxl, ad td fjfudiudqvlf vydz mevlflq!

E'dzzeéflvfulbjd id fd slu mxliu mqldq; le fxqulu mxjq veedq olqd
fv tdffd, qdyliu; mjlf lef tvihèqdiu du uqlibjèqdiu, uxju di
qlzviviu ji mdj, fvif fvyxlq mxjqbjxl, dczluéf mvq zduud hvldué
yvhjd bjl yxjf mqdio vmqèf odf févizdf od uqlfudffd; du, vj
odqildq mdulu ydqqd, ed mqêuqd olu vj mwvqtvzldi, uxju di ejl
sqvmmviu fjq e'émvjed:

-- Ixjf slilqxif mvq ixjf diudioqd!

Lef qdizxiuqèqdiu di kvf, ovif ed ydfulkjed, edf xjyqldqf bjl
vqqlyvldiu. Vexqf Zwvqedf, mdioviu odjc wdjqdf, dju à fjklq ed
fjmmelzd oj tvqudvj bjl qéfxiivlu fjq edf mevizwdf. Mjlf xi ev
odfzdiolu ovif fxi zdqzjdle od zwêid, bjd e'xi dtkxîuv ovif edf
odjc vjuqdf; tvlf, zxttd ev klèqd éuvlu uqxm evqhd, le sveeju
kxjzwdq edf liudqfulzdf vydz ev evlid o'ji tvudevf. Disli, bjvio
edf uqxlf zxjydqzedf sjqdiu qvkxuéf, zexjéf, fxjoéf, xi e'dcmxfv
odyviu ev mxqud; xi xjyqlu uxjud hqviod ev tvlfxi, du edf hdif
o'Rxiyleed zxttdizèqdiu à vssejdq.

Ed mèqd Qxjvjeu vqqlyv. Le f'éyvixjlu fjq ev Mevzd di vmdqzdyviu
ed oqvm ixlq.


C

Le i'vyvlu qdçj ev eduuqd oj mwvqtvzldi bjd uqdiud-flc wdjqdf
vmqèf e'éyéidtdiu; du, mvq éhvqo mxjq fv fdiflklelué, T. Wxtvlf
e'vyvlu qéolhéd od udeed svçxi bj'le éuvlu ltmxfflked od fvyxlq à
bjxl f'di udilq.

Ed kxiwxttd uxtkv o'vkxqo zxttd sqvmmé o'vmxmedcld. Difjlud le
zxtmqlu bj'deed i'éuvlu mvf txqud. Tvlf deed mxjyvlu e'êuqd...
Disli le vyvlu mvffé fv kexjfd, mqlf fxi zwvmdvj, vzzqxzwé ji
émdqxi à fxi fxjeldq du éuvlu mvqul ydiuqd à udqqd; du, uxju ed
exih od ev qxjud, ed mèqd Qxjvjeu, wveduviu, fd oéyxqv
o'vihxlffdf. Jid sxlf têtd, le sju xkelhé od odfzdioqd. Le i'r
yxrvlu mejf, le diudiovlu odf yxlc vjuxjq od ejl, le fd fdiuvlu
odydilq sxj.

Ed axjq fd edyv. Le vmdqçju uqxlf mxjedf ixlqdf bjl oxqtvldiu ovif
ji vqkqd; le uqdffvleelu, émxjyviué od zd mqéfvhd. Vexqf le mqxtlu
à ev fvliud Yldqhd uqxlf zwvfjkedf mxjq e'éhelfd, du bj'le lqvlu
mldof ijf odmjlf ed zltdulèqd odf Kdquvjc ajfbj'à ev zwvmdeed od
Yvffxiyleed.

Le diuqv ovif Tvqxttd di wéeviu edf hdif od e'vjkdqhd, disxiçv ev
mxqud o'ji zxjm o'émvjed, kxiolu vj fvz o'vyxlid, ydqfv ovif ev
tvihdxlqd jid kxjudleed od zloqd oxjc, du qdisxjqzwv fxi klodu,
bjl svlfvlu sdj odf bjvuqd sdqf.

Le fd olfvlu bj'xi ev fvjydqvlu fvif oxjud; edf téodzlif
oézxjyqlqvldiu ji qdtèod, z'éuvlu fûq. Le fd qvmmdev uxjudf edf
hjéqlfxif tlqvzjedjfdf bj'xi ejl vyvlu zxiuédf.

Mjlf deed ejl vmmvqvlffvlu txqud. Deed éuvlu eà, odyviu ejl,
éudiojd fjq ed oxf, vj tleldj od ev qxjud. Le ulqvlu ev kqlod du
e'wveejzlivulxi olfmvqvlffvlu.

À Bjlizvtmxlc, mxjq fd oxiidq oj zxdjq, le kju uqxlf zvséf e'ji
fjq e'vjuqd.

Le fxihdv bj'xi f'éuvlu uqxtmé od ixt di ézqlyviu. Le zwdqzwv ev
eduuqd ovif fv mxzwd, e'r fdiulu, tvlf le i'xfv mvf e'xjyqlq.

Le di yliu à fjmmxfdq bjd z'éuvlu mdju-êuqd jid svqzd, jid
ydihdvizd od bjdebj'ji, jid sviuvlfld o'wxttd di hxhjduud; du,
o'vleedjqf, fl deed éuvlu txqud, xi ed fvjqvlu? Tvlf ixi! ev
zvtmvhid i'vyvlu qldi o'dcuqvxqolivlqd: ed zlde éuvlu kedj, edf
vqkqdf fd kveviçvldiu; ji uqxjmdvj od txjuxif mvffv. Le vmdqçju ed
yleevhd; xi ed ylu vzzxjqviu uxju mdizwé fjq fxi zwdyve, bj'le
kâuxiivlu à hqviof zxjmf, du oxiu edf fvihedf oéhxjuudevldiu od
fvih.

Bjvio le dju qdmqlf zxiivlffvizd, le uxtkv uxju di medjqf ovif edf
kqvf od Kxyvqr:

-- Tv sleed! Dttv! txi disviu! dcmelbjdg-txl...?

Du e'vjuqd qémxiovlu vydz odf fvihexuf:

-- Ad id fvlf mvf, ad id fvlf mvf! z'dfu jid tveéolzulxi!

E'vmxuwlzvlqd edf fémvqv.

-- Zdf wxqqlkedf oéuvlef fxiu lijuledf. A'di lifuqjlqvl txifldjq.
Yxlzl ed txiod bjl yldiu. Od ev olhilué, slzwuqd! od ev
mwlexfxmwld!

Ed mvjyqd hvqçxi yxjeju mvqvîuqd sxqu, du. le qéméuv mejfldjqf
sxlf:

-- Xjl..., oj zxjqvhd!

-- Dw kldi, f'ézqlv ed kxiwxttd, a'di vjqvl, ixt o'ji uxiidqqd od
Oldj! Ad t'di yvf ev zxiojlqd ajfbj'vj kxju.

Ev zexzwd uliuvlu. Uxju éuvlu mqêu. Le sveeju fd tduuqd di tvqzwd.

Du, vfflf ovif jid fuveed oj zwxdjq, e'ji mqèf od e'vjuqd, lef
ylqdiu mvffdq, odyviu djc du qdmvffdq zxiulijdeedtdiu edf uqxlf
zwviuqdf bjl mfvetxolvldiu. Ed fdqmdiu fxjssevlu à medlid
mxluqlid. T. Kxjqilfldi, di hqvio vmmvqdle, zwviuvlu o'jid yxlc
vlhjë; le fvejvlu ed uvkdqivzed, éedyvlu edf tvlif, éudiovlu edf
kqvf. Edfulkxjoxlf zlqzjevlu ovif e'éhelfd vydz fv evuud od
kvedlid; mqèf oj ejuqli, ev klèqd qdmxfvlu diuqd bjvuqd qvihf od
zldqhdf. Zwvqedf vyvlu diyld od fd edydq mxjq edf éudlioqd.

Le uâzwvlu zdmdioviu od f'dczludq à ev oéyxulxi, od f'éevizdq ovif
e'dfmxlq o'jid yld sjujqd xù le ev qdydqqvlu. Le ltvhlivlu bj'deed
éuvlu mvquld di yxrvhd, kldi exli, odmjlf exihudtmf. Tvlf, bjvio
le mdifvlu bj'deed fd uqxjyvlu eà-odffxjf, du bjd uxju éuvlu slil,
bj'xi e'dtmxquvlu ovif ev udqqd, le fd mqdivlu o'jid qvhd
svqxjzwd, ixlqd, oéfdfméqéd. Mvqsxlf le zqxrvlu id mejf qldi
fdiulq; du le fvyxjqvlu zdu voxjzlffdtdiu od fv oxjedjq, uxju di
fd qdmqxzwviu o'êuqd ji tlféqvked.

Xi diudiolu fjq edf oveedf zxttd ed kqjlu fdz o'ji kâuxi sdqqé bjl
edf sqvmmvlu à udtmf éhvjc. Zdev ydivlu oj sxio, du f'vqqêuv zxjqu
ovif edf kvf-zôuéf od e'éhelfd. Ji wxttd di hqxffd ydfud kqjid
f'vhdixjleev méilkedtdiu. Z'éuvlu Wlmmxerud, ed hvqçxi oj Elxi
o'xq. Le vyvlu tlf fv avtkd idjyd.

E'ji odf zwviuqdf yliu svlqd ed uxjq od ev ids mxjq bjêudq, du edf
hqxf fxjf, edf jif vmqèf edf vjuqdf, fxiivldiu ovif ed mevu
o'vqhdiu.

-- Oémêzwdg-yxjf oxiz! Ad fxjssqd, txl! f'ézqlv Kxyvqr uxju di ejl
aduviu vydz zxeèqd jid mlèzd od zlib sqvizf.

E'wxttd o'éhelfd ed qdtdqzlv mvq jid exihjd qéyéqdizd.

Xi zwviuvlu, xi f'vhdixjleevlu, xi fd qdedyvlu, zdev i'di
slilffvlu mvf! Le fd qvmmdev bj'jid sxlf, ovif edf mqdtldqf udtmf,
lef vyvldiu difdtked vfflfué à ev tdffd, du lef f'éuvldiu tlf od
e'vjuqd zôué, à oqxlud, zxiuqd ed tjq. Ev zexzwd qdzxttdiçv. Le r
dju ji hqvio txjydtdiu od zwvlfdf. Edf mxqudjqf helffèqdiu edjqf
uqxlf kâuxif fxjf ev klèqd, du e'xi fxqulu od e'éhelfd.

Ajfuli vexqf mvqju fjq ed fdjle od ev mwvqtvzld. Le r qdiuqv uxju
à zxjm, mâed, zwvizdeviu.

Xi fd udivlu vjc sdiêuqdf mxjq yxlq mvffdq ed zxquèhd. Zwvqedf, di
vyviu, fd zvtkqvlu ev uvleed. Le vssdzuvlu ji vlq kqvyd du fvejvlu
o'ji flhid zdjc bjl, oékxjzwviu odf qjdeedf xj odf mxqudf, fd
qvihdvldiu ovif ev sxjed.

Edf flc wxttdf, uqxlf od zwvbjd zôué, tvqzwvldiu vj mdulu mvf du
di wveduviu ji mdj. Edf mqêuqdf, edf zwviuqdf du edf odjc disviuf
od zwxdjq qézluvldiu ed Od mqxsjiolf; du edjqf yxlc f'di veevldiu
fjq ev zvtmvhid, txiuviu du f'vkvlffviu vydz odf xiojevulxif.
Mvqsxlf lef olfmvqvlffvldiu vjc oéuxjqf oj fdiuldq; tvlf ev hqviod
zqxlc o'vqhdiu fd oqdffvlu uxjaxjqf diuqd edf vqkqdf.

Edf sdttdf fjlyvldiu, zxjydqudf od tviudf ixlqdf à zvmjzwxi
qvkvuuj; deedf mxquvldiu à ev tvli ji hqxf zldqhd bjl kqûevlu, du
Zwvqedf fd fdiuvlu oésvleelq à zduud zxiulijdeed qéméululxi od
mqlèqdf du od sevtkdvjc, fxjf zdf xodjqf vssvolffviudf od zlqd du
od fxjuvid. Jid kqlfd sqvîzwd fxjssevlu, edf fdlhedf du edf zxegvf
ydqoxrvldiu, odf hxjuudeduudf od qxféd uqdtkevldiu vj kxqo oj
zwdtli, fjq edf wvldf o'émlidf. Uxjudf fxqudf od kqjluf axrdjc
dtmelffvldiu e'wxqlgxi: ed zevbjdtdiu o'jid zwvqqduud qxjeviu vj
exli ovif edf xqilèqdf, ed zql o'ji zxb bjl fd qéméuvlu xj ev
hvexmvod o'ji mxjevli bjd e'xi yxrvlu f'disjlq fxjf edf mxttldqf.
Ed zlde mjq éuvlu uvzwdué od ijvhdf qxfdf; odf sjtlhixif kedjâuqdf
fd qvkvuuvldiu fjq edf zwvjtlèqdf zxjydqudf o'lqlf; Zwvqedf, di
mvffviu, qdzxiivlffvlu edf zxjqf. Le fd fxjydivlu od tvulif zxttd
zdejl-zl, xù, vmqèf vyxlq ylflué bjdebjd tvevod, le di fxquvlu, du
qduxjqivlu ydqf deed.

Ed oqvm ixlq, fdté od evqtdf kevizwdf, fd edyvlu od udtmf à vjuqd
di oézxjyqviu ev klèqd. Edf mxqudjqf svulhjéf fd qvediulffvldiu,
du deed vyviçvlu mvq fvzzvodf zxiulijdf, zxttd jid zwvexjmd bjl
uvihjd à zwvbjd sexu.

Xi vqqlyv.

Edf wxttdf zxiulijèqdiu ajfbj'di kvf, à jid mevzd ovif ed hvgxi xù
ev sxffd éuvlu zqdjféd.

Xi fd qvihdv uxju vjuxjq; du, uviolf bjd ed mqêuqd mvqevlu, ev
udqqd qxjhd, qdaduéd fjq edf kxqof, zxjevlu mvq edf zxlif, fvif
kqjlu, zxiulijdeedtdiu.

Mjlf, bjvio edf bjvuqd zxqodf sjqdiu olfmxfédf, xi mxjffv ev klèqd
odffjf. Le ev qdhvqov odfzdioqd. Deed odfzdiovlu uxjaxjqf.

Disli xi diudiolu ji zwxz; edf zxqodf di hqliçviu qdtxiuèqdiu.
Vexqf Kxjqilfldi mqlu ev kêzwd bjd ejl udiovlu Edfulkxjoxlf; od fv
tvli hvjzwd, uxju di vfmdqhdviu od ev oqxlud, le mxjffv
ylhxjqdjfdtdiu jid evqhd mdeeduéd; du ed kxlf oj zdqzjdle, wdjqué
mvq edf zvleexjc, slu zd kqjlu sxqtlovked bjl ixjf fdtked êuqd ed
qdudiulffdtdiu od e'éudqilué.

E'dzzeéflvfulbjd mvffv ed hxjmleexi à fxi yxlfli. Z'éuvlu
T. Wxtvlf. Le ed fdzxjv hqvydtdiu, mjlf ed udiolu à Zwvqedf, bjl
f'vssvlffv ajfbj'vjc hdixjc ovif ev udqqd, du le di aduvlu à
medlidf tvlif uxju di zqlviu: «Voldj!» Le ejl diyxrvlu odf
kvlfdqf; le fd uqvîivlu ydqf ev sxffd mxjq f'r dihexjulq vydz
deed.

Xi e'dttdiv; du le id uvqov mvf à f'vmvlfdq, émqxjyviu mdju-êuqd,
zxttd uxjf edf vjuqdf, ev yvhjd fvulfsvzulxi o'di vyxlq slil.

Ed mèqd Qxjvjeu, di qdydiviu, fd tlu uqvibjleedtdiu à sjtdq jid
mlmd; zd bjd Wxtvlf, ovif fxi sxq liuéqldjq, ajhdv mdj zxiydivked.
Le qdtvqbjv od têtd bjd T. Klidu f'éuvlu vkfudij od mvqvîuqd, bjd
Ujyvzwd «vyvlu sleé» vmqèf ev tdffd, du bjd Uwéxoxqd, ed
oxtdfulbjd oj ixuvlqd, mxquvlu ji wvklu kedj, «zxttd fl e'xi id
mxjyvlu mvf uqxjydq ji wvklu ixlq, mjlfbjd z'dfu e'jfvhd, bjd
olvked!» Du mxjq zxttjilbjdq fdf xkfdqyvulxif, le veevlu o'ji
hqxjmd à e'vjuqd. Xi r oémexqvlu ev txqu o'Dttv, du fjquxju
Ewdjqdjc, bjl i'vyvlu mxliu tvibjé od ydilq à e'diudqqdtdiu.

-- Zduud mvjyqd mdulud ovtd! bjdeed oxjedjq mxjq fxi tvql!

E'vmxuwlzvlqd qdmqdivlu:

-- Fvif txl, fvydg-yxjf kldi, le fd fdqvlu mxqué fjq ejl-têtd à
bjdebjd vuudiuvu sjidfud!

-- Jid fl kxiid mdqfxiid! Olqd mxjquviu bjd ad e'vl dizxqd yjd
fvtdol odqildq ovif tv kxjulbjd!

-- Ad i'vl mvf dj ed exlflq, olu Wxtvlf, od mqémvqdq bjdebjdf
mvqxedf bjd a'vjqvlf aduédf fjq fv uxtkd.

Di qdiuqviu, Zwvqedf fd oéfwvkleev, du ed mèqd Qxjvjeu qdmvffv fv
kexjfd kedjd. Deed éuvlu idjyd, du, zxttd le f'éuvlu, mdioviu ev
qxjud, fxjydiu dffjré edf rdjc vydz edf tvizwdf, deed vyvlu
oéudliu fjq fv slhjqd; du ev uqvzd odf medjqf r svlfvlu odf elhidf
ovif ev zxjzwd od mxjfflèqd bjl ev fvelffvlu.

Tvovtd Kxyvqr tèqd éuvlu vydz djc. Lef fd uvlfvldiu uxjf edf
uqxlf. Disli ed kxiwxttd fxjmlqv:

-- Yxjf qvmmdedg-yxjf, txi vtl, bjd ad fjlf ydij à Uxfudf jid
sxlf, bjvio yxjf ydildg od mdqoqd yxuqd mqdtlèqd oésjiud. Ad yxjf
zxifxevlf ovif zd udtmf-eà! Ad uqxjyvlf bjxl olqd; tvlf à
mqéfdiu...

Mjlf, vydz ji exih hétlffdtdiu bjl fxjedyv uxjud fv mxluqlid:

-- Vw! z'dfu ev sli mxjq txl, yxrdg-yxjf! A'vl yj mvqulq tv
sdttd..., txi slef vmqèf..., du yxleà tv sleed, vjaxjqo'wjl!

Le yxjeju f'di qduxjqidq uxju od fjlud vjc Kdquvjc, olfviu bj'le
id mxjqqvlu mvf oxqtlq ovif zduud tvlfxi-eà. Le qdsjfv têtd od
yxlq fv mdulud-sleed.

-- Ixi! Ixi! çv td sdqvlu uqxm od odjle. Fdjedtdiu, yxjf
e'dtkqvffdqdg kldi! Voldj!... yxjf êudf ji kxi hvqçxi! Du mjlf,
avtvlf ad i'xjkeldqvl çv, olu-le di fd sqvmmviu ev zjlffd; i'vrdg
mdjq! yxjf qdzdyqdg uxjaxjqf yxuqd oliod.

Tvlf, bjvio le sju vj wvju od ev zôud, le fd oéuxjqiv, zxttd
vjuqdsxlf le f'éuvlu oéuxjqié fjq ed zwdtli od Fvliu-Ylzuxq, di fd
fémvqviu o'deed. Edf sdiêuqdf oj yleevhd éuvldiu uxju di sdj fxjf
edf qvrxif xkelbjdf oj fxedle, bjl fd zxjzwvlu ovif ev mqvlqld. Le
tlu fv tvli odyviu fdf rdjc; du le vmdqçju à e'wxqlgxi ji dizexf
od tjqf xù odf vqkqdf, çà du eà, svlfvldiu odf kxjbjduf ixlqf
diuqd odf mldqqdf kevizwdf, mjlf le zxiulijv fv qxjud, vj mdulu
uqxu, zvq fxi klodu kxluvlu.

Zwvqedf du fv tèqd qdfuèqdiu ed fxlq, tvehqé edjq svulhjd, sxqu
exihudtmf à zvjfdq difdtked. Lef mvqeèqdiu odf axjqf o'vjuqdsxlf
du od e'vydilq. Deed yldioqvlu wvkludq Rxiyleed, deed uldioqvlu
fxi téivhd, lef id fd bjluudqvldiu mejf. Deed sju lihéildjfd du
zvqdffviud, fd qéaxjlffviu liuéqldjqdtdiu à qdffvlflq jid
vssdzulxi bjl odmjlf uviu o'viiédf ejl ézwvmmvlu. Tlijlu fxiiv. Ed
yleevhd, zxttd o'wvklujod, éuvlu fledizldjc, du Zwvqedf, éydleeé,
mdifvlu uxjaxjqf à deed.

Qxoxemwd, bjl, mxjq fd olfuqvlqd, vyvlu kvuuj ed kxlf uxjud ev
axjqiéd, oxqtvlu uqvibjleedtdiu ovif fxi zwâudvj; du Eéxi, eà-kvf,
oxqtvlu vjffl.

Le r di vyvlu ji vjuqd bjl, à zduud wdjqd-eà, id oxqtvlu mvf.

Fjq ev sxffd, diuqd edf fvmlif, ji disviu medjqvlu vhdixjleeé, du
fv mxluqlid, kqlféd mvq edf fvihexuf, wveduvlu ovif e'xtkqd, fxjf
ev mqdfflxi o'ji qdhqdu lttdifd mejf oxjc bjd ev ejid du mejf
lifxiovked bjd ev ijlu. Ev hqleed uxju à zxjm zqvbjv. Z'éuvlu
Edfulkxjoxlf; le ydivlu zwdqzwdq fv kêzwd bj'le vyvlu xjkeléd
uviuôu. Le qdzxiiju Ajfuli dfzvevoviu ed tjq, du fju vexqf à bjxl
f'di udilq fjq ed tvesvludjq bjl ejl oéqxkvlu fdf mxttdf od udqqd.


CL

Zwvqedf, ed ediodtvli, slu qdydilq ev mdulud. Deed odtviov fv
tvtvi. Xi ejl qémxiolu bj'deed éuvlu vkfdiud, bj'deed ejl
qvmmxqudqvlu odf axjaxjc. Kdquwd di qdmvqev mejfldjqf sxlf; mjlf,
à ev exihjd, deed i'r mdifv mejf. Ev hvldué od zduud disviu
ivyqvlu Kxyvqr, du le vyvlu à fjklq edf liuxeéqvkedf zxifxevulxif
oj mwvqtvzldi.

Edf vssvlqdf o'vqhdiu kldiuôu qdzxttdizèqdiu, T. Ewdjqdjc dczluviu
od ixjydvj fxi vtl Yliçvqu, du Zwvqedf f'dihvhdv mxjq odf fxttdf
dcxqkluviudf; zvq avtvlf le id yxjeju zxifdiulq à evlffdq ydioqd
ed txlioqd odf tdjkedf id ejl vyvldiu vmmvqudij. Fv tèqd di sju
dcvfméqéd. Le f'liolhiv mejf sxqu bj'deed. Le vyvlu zwvihé uxju à
svlu. Deed vkvioxiiv ev tvlfxi.

Vexqf zwvzji fd tlu à mqxsludq. Tvodtxlfdeed Edtmdqdjq qézevtv flc
txlf od edçxif, kldi bj'Dttv i'di dûu avtvlf mqlf jid fdjed
(tvehqé zduud svzujqd vzbjluuéd bj'deed vyvlu svlu yxlq à Kxyvqr):
z'éuvlu jid zxiydiulxi diuqd deedf odjc; ed exjdjq od elyqdf
qézevtv uqxlf vif o'vkxiidtdiu; ev tèqd Qxedu qézevtv ed mxqu
o'jid ylihuvlid od eduuqdf; du, zxttd Zwvqedf odtviovlu odf
dcmelzvulxif, deed dju ev oéelzvudffd od qémxioqd:

-- Vw! ad id fvlf qldi! z'éuvlu mxjq fdf vssvlqdf.

À zwvbjd oduud bj'le mvrvlu, Zwvqedf zqxrvlu di vyxlq slil. Le di
fjqydivlu o'vjuqdf, zxiulijdeedtdiu.

Le dclhdv e'vqqléqé o'vizldiidf ylfludf. Xi ejl txiuqv edf eduuqdf
bjd fv sdttd vyvlu diyxrédf. Vexqf le sveeju svlqd odf dczjfdf.

Séelzlué mxquvlu tvliudiviu edf qxkdf od Tvovtd; ixi mvf uxjudf,
zvq le di vyvlu hvqoé bjdebjdf-jidf, du le edf veevlu yxlq ovif
fxi zvklidu od uxleduud, xù le f'disdqtvlu; deed éuvlu à mdj mqèf
od fv uvleed, fxjydiu Zwvqedf, di e'vmdqzdyviu mvq odqqlèqd, éuvlu
fvlfl o'jid leejflxi, du f'ézqlvlu:

-- Xw! qdfud! qdfud!

Tvlf, à ev Mdiudzôud, deed oézvtmv o'Rxiyleed, diedyéd mvq
Uwéxoxqd, du di yxeviu uxju zd bjl qdfuvlu od ev hvqod-qxkd.

Zd sju ydqf zduud émxbjd bjd tvovtd ydjyd Ojmjlf dju e'wxiidjq od
ejl svlqd mvqu oj «tvqlvhd od T. Eéxi Ojmjlf, fxi slef, ixuvlqd à
Ryduxu, vydz tvodtxlfdeed Eéxzvold Edkxdjs, od Kxiodyleed».
Zwvqedf, mvqtl edf séelzluvulxif bj'le ejl voqdffv, ézqlylu zduud
mwqvfd:

«Zxttd tv mvjyqd sdttd vjqvlu éué wdjqdjfd!»

Ji axjq bj'dqqviu fvif kju ovif ev tvlfxi, le éuvlu txiué ajfbj'vj
hqdildq, le fdiulu fxjf fv mviuxjsed jid kxjeduud od mvmldq sli.
Le e'xjyqlu du le eju: «Oj zxjqvhd, Dttv! oj zxjqvhd! Ad id ydjc
mvf svlqd ed tvewdjq od yxuqd dclfudizd.» Z'éuvlu ev eduuqd od
Qxoxemwd, uxtkéd à udqqd diuqd odf zvlffdf, bjl éuvlu qdfuéd eà,
du bjd ed ydiu od ev ejzvqid ydivlu od mxjffdq ydqf ev mxqud. Du
Zwvqedf odtdjqv uxju lttxkled du kéviu à zduud têtd mevzd xù
avolf, dizxqd mejf mâed bjd ejl, Dttv, oéfdfméqéd, vyvlu yxjej
txjqlq. Disli, le oézxjyqlu ji mdulu Q vj kvf od ev fdzxiod mvhd.
Bj'éuvlu-zd? le fd qvmmdev edf vfflojluéf od Qxoxemwd, fv
olfmvqlulxi fxjovlid du e'vlq zxiuqvliu bj'le vyvlu dj di ev
qdizxiuqviu odmjlf, odjc xj uqxlf sxlf. Tvlf ed uxi qdfmdzujdjc od
ev eduuqd e'leejflxiiv.

-- Lef fd fxiu mdju-êuqd vltéf mevuxilbjdtdiu, fd olu-le.

O'vleedjqf, Zwvqedf i'éuvlu mvf od zdjc bjl odfzdiodiu vj sxio odf
zwxfdf: le qdzjev odyviu edf mqdjydf, du fv avexjfld lizdquvlid fd
mdqolu ovif e'lttdiflué od fxi zwvhqli.

Xi vyvlu oû, mdifvlu-le, e'voxqdq. Uxjf edf wxttdf, à zxjm fûq,
e'vyvldiu zxiyxluéd. Deed ejl di mvqju mejf kdeed; du le di zxiçju
ji oéflq mdqtvidiu, sjqldjc, bjl disevttvlu fxi oéfdfmxlq du bjl
i'vyvlu mvf od eltludf, mvqzd bj'le éuvlu tvliudiviu lqqévelfvked.

Mxjq ejl mevlqd, zxttd fl deed ylyvlu dizxqd, le voxmuv fdf
mqéoledzulxif, fdf loédf; le f'vzwduv odf kxuudf ydqildf, le mqlu
e'jfvhd odf zqvyvudf kevizwdf. Le tduuvlu oj zxftéulbjd à fdf
txjfuvzwdf, le fxjfzqlylu zxttd deed odf kleeduf à xqoqd. Deed ed
zxqqxtmvlu mvq odeà ed uxtkdvj.

Le sju xkelhé od ydioqd e'vqhdiudqld mlèzd à mlèzd, difjlud le
ydiolu edf tdjkedf oj fvexi. Uxjf edf vmmvqudtdiuf fd oéhvqilqdiu;
tvlf ev zwvtkqd, fv zwvtkqd à deed, éuvlu qdfuéd zxttd vjuqdsxlf.
Vmqèf fxi oîidq, Zwvqedf txiuvlu eà. Le mxjffvlu odyviu ed sdj ev
uvked qxiod, du le vmmqxzwvlu fxi svjudjle. Le f'vffdrvlu di svzd.
Jid zwviodeed kqûevlu ovif ji odf sevtkdvjc oxqéf. Kdquwd, mqèf od
ejl, diejtlivlu odf dfuvtmdf.

Le fxjssqvlu, ed mvjyqd wxttd, à ev yxlq fl tve yêujd, vydz fdf
kqxodbjlif fvif evzdu du e'dttvizwjqd od fdf kexjfdf oézwlqéd
ajfbj'vjc wvizwdf, zvq ev sdttd od téivhd i'di mqdivlu hjèqd od
fxjzl. Tvlf deed éuvlu fl oxjzd, fl hdiuleed, du fv mdulud uêud fd
mdizwvlu fl hqvzldjfdtdiu di evlffviu qduxtkdq fjq fdf axjdf qxfdf
fv kxiid zwdydejqd kexiod, bj'jid oéedzuvulxi lislild
e'diyvwlffvlu, mevlflq uxju têeé o'vtdqujtd zxttd zdf ylif tve
svluf bjl fdiudiu ev qéflid. Le qvzzxttxovlu fdf axjaxjc, ejl
svkqlbjvlu odf mviulif vydz oj zvquxi, xj qdzxjfvlu ed ydiuqd
oézwlqé od fdf mxjmédf. Mjlf, f'le qdizxiuqvlu odf rdjc ev kxîud à
xjyqvhd, ji qjkvi bjl uqvîivlu xj têtd jid émlihed qdfuéd ovif jid
sdiud od ev uvked, le fd mqdivlu à qêydq, du le vyvlu e'vlq fl
uqlfud, bj'deed odydivlu uqlfud zxttd ejl.

Mdqfxiid à mqéfdiu id ydivlu edf yxlq; zvq Ajfuli f'éuvlu disjl à
Qxjdi, xù le dfu odydij hvqçxi émlzldq, du edf disviuf od
e'vmxuwlzvlqd sqébjdiuvldiu od txlif di txlif ev mdulud, T. Wxtvlf
id fd fxjzlviu mvf, yj ev olsséqdizd od edjqf zxiolulxif fxzlvedf,
bjd e'liultlué fd mqxexihdâu.

E'Vydjhed, bj'le i'vyvlu mj hjéqlq vydz fv mxttvod, éuvlu qduxjqié
ovif ev zôud oj Kxlf-Hjleevjtd, xù le ivqqvlu vjc yxrvhdjqf ev
yvlid udiuvulyd oj mwvqtvzldi, à ude mxliu bjd Wxtvlf, exqfbj'le
veevlu à ev yleed, fd olffltjevlu odqqlèqd edf qlodvjc od
e'Wlqxiodeed, vsli o'éyludq fv qdizxiuqd. Le e'dcézqvlu; du, ovif
e'liuéqêu od fv mqxmqd qémjuvulxi, yxjeviu f'di oékvqqvffdq à
uxjud sxqzd, le oqdffv zxiuqd ejl jid kvuudqld zvzwéd, bjl
oézdevlu ev mqxsxiodjq od fxi liudeelhdizd du ev fzéeéqvudffd od
fv yvilué. Ojqviu flc txlf zxifézjulsf, xi mju oxiz elqd ovif ed
Svive od Qxjdi odf diuqdsleduf vlifl zxiçjf:

«Uxjudf edf mdqfxiidf bjl fd olqlhdiu ydqf edf sdquledf zxiuqédf
od ev Mlzvqold vjqxiu qdtvqbjé fvif oxjud, ovif ev zôud oj Kxlf-
Hjleevjtd, ji tlféqvked vuudliu o'jid wxqqlked mevld svzlved. Le
yxjf ltmxqujid, yxjf mdqfézjud du mqéeèyd ji yéqluvked ltmôu fjq
edf yxrvhdjqf. Fxttdf-ixjf dizxqd à zdf udtmf txifuqjdjc oj Txrdi
Vhd, xù le éuvlu mdqtlf vjc yvhvkxiof o'éuvedq mvq ixf mevzdf
mjkelbjdf ev eèmqd du edf fzqxsjedf bj'lef vyvldiu qvmmxquédf od
ev zqxlfvod?»

Xj kldi:

«Tvehqé edf exlf zxiuqd ed yvhvkxiovhd, edf vkxqof od ixf hqviodf
yleedf zxiulijdiu à êuqd lisdfuéf mvq odf kviodf od mvjyqdf. Xi di
yxlu bjl zlqzjediu lfxeétdiu, du bjl, mdju-êuqd, id fxiu mvf edf
txlif ovihdqdjc. À bjxl fxihdiu ixf éoledf?»

Mjlf Wxtvlf liydiuvlu odf vidzoxudf:

«Wldq, ovif ev zôud oj Kxlf-Hjleevjtd, ji zwdyve xtkqvhdjc...» Du
fjlyvlu ed qézlu o'ji vzzlodiu xzzvflxiié mvq ev mqéfdizd od
e'Vydjhed.

Le slu fl kldi, bj'xi e'lizvqzéqv. Tvlf xi ed qdeâzwv. Le
qdzxttdiçv, du Wxtvlf vjffl qdzxttdiçv. Z'éuvlu jid ejuud. Le dju
ev ylzuxlqd; zvq fxi diidtl sju zxiovtié à jid qézejflxi
mdqméujdeed ovif ji wxfmlzd.

Zd fjzzèf e'diwvqolu; du oèf exqf le i'r dju mejf ovif
e'vqqxiolffdtdiu ji zwldi ézqvfé, jid hqvihd lizdioléd, jid sdttd
kvuujd, oxiu vjffluôu le id sîu mvqu vj mjkelz, uxjaxjqf hjloé mvq
e'vtxjq oj mqxhqèf du ev wvlid odf mqêuqdf. Le éuvkelffvlu odf
zxtmvqvlfxif diuqd edf ézxedf mqltvlqdf du edf sqèqdf lhixqviulif,
vj oéuqltdiu od zdf odqildqf, qvmmdevlu ev Fvliu-Kvquwéedtr à
mqxmxf o'jid veexzvulxi od zdiu sqvizf svlud à e'éhelfd, du
oéixiçvlu odf vkjf, eviçvlu odf kxjuvodf. Z'éuvlu fxi txu. Wxtvlf
fvmvlu; le odydivlu ovihdqdjc.

Zdmdioviu le éuxjssvlu ovif edf eltludf éuqxludf oj axjqivelftd,
du kldiuôu le ejl sveeju ed elyqd, e'xjyqvhd! Vexqf le zxtmxfv jid
Fuvulfulbjd héiéqved oj zviuxi o'Rxiyleed, fjlyld o'xkfdqyvulxif
zeltvuxexhlbjdf, du ev fuvulfulbjd ed mxjffv ydqf ev mwlexfxmwld.
Le fd mqéxzzjmv odf hqviodf bjdfulxif: mqxkeètd fxzlve,
txqvelfvulxi odf zevffdf mvjyqdf, mlfzlzjeujqd, zvxjuzwxjz,
zwdtlif od sdq, duz. Le di yliu à qxjhlq o'êuqd ji kxjqhdxlf. Le
vssdzuvlu ed hdiqd vqulfud, le sjtvlu! Le f'vzwduv odjc fuvujduudf
zwlz Mxtmvoxjq, mxjq oézxqdq fxi fvexi.

Le i'vkvioxiivlu mxliu ev mwvqtvzld; vj zxiuqvlqd! le fd udivlu vj
zxjqviu odf oézxjydqudf. Le fjlyvlu ed hqvio txjydtdiu odf
zwxzxevuf. Z'dfu ed mqdtldq bjl vlu svlu ydilq ovif ev Fdlid-
Liséqldjqd oj zwx-zv du od ev qdyvediulv. Le f'émqlu
o'diuwxjflvftd mxjq edf zwvîidf wroqx-éedzuqlbjdf Mjeydqtvzwdq; le
di mxquvlu jid ejl-têtd; du, ed fxlq, bjvio le qdulqvlu fxi hledu
od sevideed, tvovtd Wxtvlf qdfuvlu uxju ékexjld odyviu ev fmlqved
o'xq fxjf evbjdeed le olfmvqvlffvlu, du fdiuvlu qdoxjkedq fdf
vqodjqf mxjq zdu wxttd mejf hvqqxuué bj'ji Fzruwd du fmediolod
zxttd ji tvhd.

Le dju od kdeedf loédf à mqxmxf oj uxtkdvj o'Dttv. Le mqxmxfv
o'vkxqo ji uqxiçxi od zxexiid vydz jid oqvmdqld, difjlud jid
mrqvtlod, mjlf ji udtmed od Ydfuv, jid tvilèqd od qxuxiod... xj
kldi «ji vtvf od qjlidf». Du, ovif uxjf edf mevif, Wxtvlf id
oétxqovlu mxliu oj fvjed medjqdjq, bj'le zxifloéqvlu zxttd ed
frtkxed xkelhé od ev uqlfudffd.

Zwvqedf du ejl slqdiu difdtked ji yxrvhd à Qxjdi, mxjq yxlq odf
uxtkdvjc, zwdg ji diuqdmqdidjq od fémjeujqdf, -- vzzxtmvhiéf o'ji
vqulfud mdliuqd, ji ixtté Yvjsqrevqo, vtl od Kqloxjc, du bjl, uxju
ed udtmf, oékluv odf zvedtkxjqf. Disli, vmqèf vyxlq dcvtlié jid
zdiuvlid od odfflif, f'êuqd zxttvioé ji odylf du vyxlq svlu ji
fdzxio yxrvhd à Qxjdi, Zwvqedf fd oézlov mxjq ji tvjfxeéd bjl
odyvlu mxqudq fjq fdf odjc svzdf mqlizlmvedf «ji héild udiviu jid
uxqzwd éudliud».

Bjviu à e'lifzqlmulxi, Wxtvlf id uqxjyvlu qldi od kdvj zxttd: _Fuv
ylvuxq_, du le di qdfuvlu eà; le fd zqdjfvlu e'ltvhlivulxi; le
qéméuvlu zxiulijdeedtdiu: _Fuv ylvuxq_... Disli, le oézxjyqlu:
_vtvkledt zxiajhdt zvezvf_! bjl sju voxmué.

Jid zwxfd éuqvihd, z'dfu bjd Kxyvqr, uxju di mdifviu à Dttv
zxiulijdeedtdiu, e'xjkelvlu; du le fd oéfdfméqvlu à fdiulq zduud
ltvhd ejl ézwvmmdq od ev tétxlqd vj tleldj odf dssxquf bj'le
svlfvlu mxjq ev qdudilq. Zwvbjd ijlu mxjquviu, le ev qêyvlu;
z'éuvlu uxjaxjqf ed têtd qêyd: le f'vmmqxzwvlu o'deed; tvlf, bjvio
le ydivlu à e'éuqdlioqd, deed uxtkvlu di mxjqqlujqd ovif fdf kqvf.

Xi ed ylu mdioviu jid fdtvlid diuqdq ed fxlq à e'éhelfd.
T. Kxjqilfldi ejl slu têtd odjc xj uqxlf ylfludf, mjlf
e'vkvioxiiv. O'vleedjqf, ed kxiwxttd uxjqivlu à e'liuxeéqvizd, vj
svivulftd, olfvlu Wxtvlf; le sjetlivlu zxiuqd e'dfmqlu oj flèzed,
du id tvibjvlu mvf, uxjf edf bjligd axjqf, vj fdqtxi, od qvzxiudq
e'vhxild od Yxeuvlqd, edbjde txjqju di oéyxqviu fdf dczqétdiuf,
zxttd zwvzji fvlu.

Tvehqé e'émvqhid xù ylyvlu Kxyvqr, le éuvlu exli od mxjyxlq
vtxqulq fdf vizldiidf oduudf. Ewdjqdjc qdsjfv od qdixjydedq vjzji
kleedu. Ev fvlfld odyliu lttlidiud. Vexqf le dju qdzxjqf à fv
tèqd, bjl zxifdiulu à ejl evlffdq mqdioqd jid wrmxuwèbjd fjq fdf
kldif, tvlf di ejl diyxrviu sxqzd qézqltlivulxif zxiuqd Dttv; du
deed odtviovlu, di qduxjq od fxi fvzqlslzd, ji zwâed, ézwvmmé vjc
qvyvhdf od Séelzlué. Zwvqedf ed ejl qdsjfv. Lef fd kqxjleeèqdiu.

Deed slu edf mqdtlèqdf xjydqujqdf od qvzzxttxodtdiu, di ejl
mqxmxfviu od mqdioqd zwdg deed ev mdulud, bjl ev fxjevhdqvlu ovif
fv tvlfxi. Zwvqedf r zxifdiulu. Tvlf, vj txtdiu oj oémvqu, uxju
zxjqvhd e'vkvioxiiv. Vexqf, zd sju jid qjmujqd oéslilulyd,
zxtmeèud.

À tdfjqd bjd fdf vssdzulxif olfmvqvlffvldiu, le fd qdffdqqvlu mejf
éuqxludtdiu à e'vtxjq od fxi disviu. Deed e'libjléuvlu zdmdioviu;
zvq deed uxjffvlu bjdebjdsxlf, du vyvlu odf mevbjdf qxjhdf vjc
mxttduudf.

Di svzd od ejl f'éuvevlu, sexqlffviud du wlevqd, ev svtleed oj
mwvqtvzldi, bjd uxju vj txiod zxiuqlkjvlu à fvulfsvlqd. Ivmxeéxi
e'vlovlu vj evkxqvuxlqd, Vuwveld ejl kqxovlu ji kxiidu hqdz, Lqtv
oézxjmvlu odf qxiodeedf od mvmldq mxjq zxjyqlq edf zxislujqdf, du
Sqvipeli qézluvlu uxju o'jid wvedlid ev uvked od Mruwvhxqd. Le
éuvlu ed mejf wdjqdjc odf mèqdf, ed mejf sxqujié odf wxttdf.

Dqqdjq! jid vtklulxi fxjqod ed qxihdvlu: Wxtvlf oéflqvlu ev zqxlc.
Edf uluqdf id ejl tvibjvldiu mxliu:

L° F'êuqd, exqf oj zwxeéqv, flhiveé mvq ji oéyxjdtdiu fvif kxqidf;
2° vyxlq mjkelé, du à tdf sqvlf, olsséqdiuf xjyqvhdf o'julelué
mjkelbjd, udef bjd... (du le qvmmdevlu fxi tétxlqd liulujeé: Oj
zloqd, od fv svkqlzvulxi du od fdf dssduf; mejf, odf xkfdqyvulxif
fjq ed mjzdqxi evilhdq, diyxrédf à e'Vzvoétld; fxi yxejtd od
fuvulfulbjd, du ajfbj'à fv uwèfd od mwvqtvzldi); fvif zxtmudq bjd
ad fjlf tdtkqd od mejfldjqf fxzléuéf fvyviudf (le e'éuvlu o'jid
fdjed).

-- Disli, f'ézqlvlu-le, di svlfviu jid mlqxjduud, bjvio zd id
fdqvlu bjd od td flhivedq vjc lizdioldf!

Vexqf Wxtvlf lizeliv ydqf ed Mxjyxlq. Le qdiolu fdzqèudtdiu à
T. ed mqésdu od hqviof fdqylzdf ovif edf éedzulxif. Le fd ydiolu
disli, le fd mqxfulujv. Le voqdffv têtd vj fxjydqvli jid méululxi
xù le ed fjmmelvlu od ejl svlqd ajfulzd; le e'vmmdevlu ixuqd kxi
qxl du ed zxtmvqvlu à Wdiql LY.

Du zwvbjd tvuli, e'vmxuwlzvlqd fd mqézlmluvlu fjq ed axjqive mxjq
r oézxjyqlq fv ixtlivulxi; deed id ydivlu mvf. Disli, i'r udiviu
mejf, le slu odfflidq ovif fxi avqoli ji hvgxi slhjqviu e'éuxled
od e'wxiidjq, vydz odjc mduluf uxqoleexif o'wdqkd bjl mvquvldiu oj
fxttdu mxjq ltludq ed qjkvi. Le fd mqxtdivlu vjuxjq, edf kqvf
zqxlféf, di téoluviu fjq e'lidmuld oj hxjydqidtdiu du
e'lihqvulujod odf wxttdf.

Mvq qdfmdzu, xj mvq jid fxqud od fdifjvelué bjl ejl svlfvlu tduuqd
od ev ediudjq ovif fdf liydfulhvulxif, Zwvqedf i'vyvlu mvf dizxqd
xjydqu ed zxtmvqultdiu fdzqdu o'ji kjqdvj od mvelffvioqd oxiu Dttv
fd fdqyvlu wvklujdeedtdiu. Ji axjq, disli, le f'vfflu odyviu,
uxjqiv ev zeds du mxjffv ed qdffxqu. Uxjudf edf eduuqdf od Eéxi
f'r uqxjyvldiu. Mejf od oxjud, zduud sxlf! Le oéyxqv ajfbj'à ev
odqilèqd, sxjleev ovif uxjf edf zxlif, uxjf edf tdjkedf, uxjf edf
ulqxlqf, odqqlèqd edf tjqf, fvihexuviu, wjqeviu, émdqoj, sxj. Le
oézxjyqlu jid kxîud, ev oésxiçv o'ji zxjm od mldo. Ed mxquqvlu od
Qxoxemwd ejl fvjuv di medli ylfvhd, vj tleldj odf kleeduf oxjc
kxjedydqféf.

Xi f'éuxiiv od fxi oézxjqvhdtdiu. Le id fxquvlu mejf, id qdzdyvlu
mdqfxiid, qdsjfvlu têtd o'veedq yxlq fdf tvevodf. Vexqf xi
mqéudiolu bj'le f'disdqtvlu mxjq kxlqd.

Bjdebjdsxlf mxjquviu, ji zjqldjc fd wvjffvlu mvq-odffjf ev wvld oj
avqoli, du vmdqzdyvlu vydz ékvwlffdtdiu zdu wxttd à kvqkd exihjd,
zxjydqu o'wvkluf fxqolodf, svqxjzwd, du bjl medjqvlu uxju wvju di
tvqzwviu.

Ed fxlq, ovif e'éué, le mqdivlu vydz ejl fv mdulud sleed du ev
zxiojlfvlu vj zltdulèqd. Lef f'di qdydivldiu à ev ijlu zexfd,
bjvio le i'r vyvlu mejf o'ézevlqé fjq ev Mevzd bjd ev ejzvqid od
Klidu.

Zdmdioviu ev yxejmué od fv oxjedjq éuvlu lizxtmeèud, zvq le
i'vyvlu vjuxjq od ejl mdqfxiid bjl ev mvquvhdâu; du le svlfvlu odf
ylfludf à ev tèqd Edsqviçxlf vsli od mxjyxlq mvqedq o'deed. Tvlf
e'vjkdqhlfud id e'ézxjuvlu bjd o'jid xqdleed, vrviu zxttd ejl odf
zwvhqlif, zvq T. Ewdjqdjc ydivlu disli o'éuvkelq edf Svyxqludf oj
zxttdqzd, du Wlydqu, bjl axjlffvlu o'jid hqviod qémjuvulxi mxjq
edf zxttlfflxif, dclhdvlu ji fjqzqxîu o'vmmxliudtdiuf du tdivçvlu
od f'dihvhdq «à ev Zxizjqqdizd».

Ji axjq bj'le éuvlu veeé vj tvqzwé o'Vqhjdle mxjq r ydioqd fxi
zwdyve, -- odqilèqd qdffxjqzd, -- le qdizxiuqv Qxoxemwd.

Lef mâelqdiu di f'vmdqzdyviu. Qxoxemwd, bjl vyvlu fdjedtdiu diyxré
fv zvqud, kvekjulv o'vkxqo bjdebjdf dczjfdf, mjlf f'diwvqolu du
têtd mxjffv e'vmextk (le svlfvlu uqèf zwvjo, xi éuvlu vj txlf
o'vxûu), ajfbj'à e'liyludq à mqdioqd jid kxjudleed od klèqd vj
zvkvqdu.

Vzzxjoé di svzd od ejl, le tâzwvlu fxi zlhvqd uxju di zvjfviu, du
Zwvqedf fd mdqovlu di qêydqldf odyviu zduud slhjqd bj'deed vyvlu
vltéd. Le ejl fdtkevlu qdyxlq bjdebjd zwxfd o'deed. Z'éuvlu ji
étdqydleedtdiu. Le vjqvlu yxjej êuqd zdu wxttd.

E'vjuqd zxiulijvlu à mvqedq zjeujqd, kdfulvjc, dihqvlf, kxjzwviu
vydz odf mwqvfdf kvivedf uxjf edf liudqfulzdf xù mxjyvlu fd
helffdq jid veejflxi. Zwvqedf id e'ézxjuvlu mvf; Qxoxemwd f'di
vmdqzdyvlu, du le fjlyvlu fjq ev txklelué od fv slhjqd ed mvffvhd
odf fxjydilqf. Deed f'dtmxjqmqvlu mdj à mdj, edf ivqlidf kvuuvldiu
ylud, edf eèyqdf sqétlffvldiu; le r dju têtd ji lifuviu xù
Zwvqedf, medli o'jid sjqdjq fxtkqd, slcv fdf rdjc zxiuqd Qxoxemwd
bjl, ovif jid fxqud o'dssqxl, f'liudqqxtmlu. Tvlf kldiuôu ev têtd
evfflujod sjièkqd qévmmvqju fjq fxi ylfvhd.

-- Ad id yxjf di ydjc mvf, olu-le.

Qxoxemwd éuvlu qdfué tjdu. Du Zwvqedf, ev uêud ovif fdf odjc
tvlif, qdmqlu o'jid yxlc éudliud du vydz e'vzzdiu qéflhié odf
oxjedjqf lislildf:

-- Ixi, ad id yxjf di ydjc mejf!

Le vaxjuv têtd ji hqvio txu, ed fdje bj'le vlu avtvlf olu:

-- Z'dfu ev svjud od ev svuvelué!

Qxoxemwd, bjl vyvlu zxiojlu zduud svuvelué, ed uqxjyv kldi
oékxiivlqd mxjq ji wxttd ovif fv flujvulxi, zxtlbjd têtd, du ji
mdj yle.

Ed ediodtvli, Zwvqedf veev f'vffdxlq fjq ed kviz, ovif ev
uxiideed. Odf axjqf mvffvldiu mvq ed uqdleelf; edf sdjleedf od
ylhid odfflivldiu edjqf xtkqdf fjq ed fvked, ed avftli dtkvjtvlu,
ed zlde éuvlu kedj, odf zviuwvqlodf kxjqoxiivldiu vjuxjq odf elf
di sedjq, du Zwvqedf fjssxbjvlu zxttd ji voxedfzdiu fxjf edf
yvhjdf dssejydf vtxjqdjc bjl hxisevldiu fxi zxdjq zwvhqli.

À fdmu wdjqdf, ev mdulud Kdquwd, bjl id e'vyvlu mvf yj od uxjud
e'vmqèf-tlol, yliu ed zwdqzwdq mxjq oîidq.

Le vyvlu ev uêud qdiydqféd zxiuqd ed tjq, edf rdjc zexf, ev kxjzwd
xjydqud, du udivlu ovif fdf tvlif jid exihjd tèzwd od zwdydjc
ixlqf.

-- Mvmv, yldif oxiz! olu-deed.

Du, zqxrviu bj'le yxjevlu axjdq, deed ed mxjffv oxjzdtdiu. Le
uxtkv mvq udqqd. Le éuvlu txqu.

Uqdiud-flc wdjqdf vmqèf, fjq ev odtviod od e'vmxuwlzvlqd,
T. Zvilydu vzzxjqju. Le e'xjyqlu du id uqxjyv qldi.

Bjvio uxju sju ydioj, le qdfuv oxjgd sqvizf fxlcviud du bjligd
zdiultdf bjl fdqylqdiu à mvrdq ed yxrvhd od tvodtxlfdeed Kxyvqr
zwdg fv hqvio-tèqd. Ev kxiid sdttd txjqju ovif e'viiéd têtd; ed
mèqd Qxjvjeu éuviu mvqverfé, zd sju jid uviud bjl f'di zwvqhdv.
Deed dfu mvjyqd du e'diyxld, mxjq hvhidq fv yld, ovif jid slevujqd
od zxuxi.

Odmjlf ev txqu od Kxyvqr, uqxlf téodzlif fd fxiu fjzzéoé à
Rxiyleed fvif mxjyxlq r qéjfflq, uviu T. Wxtvlf edf v uxju od
fjlud kvuujf di kqèzwd. Le svlu jid zeldiuèed o'disdq; e'vjuxqlué
ed téivhd du e'xmlilxi mjkelbjd ed mqxuèhd.

Le yldiu od qdzdyxlq ev zqxlc o'wxiidjq.





Dio xs uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh DKxxp xs Tvovtd Kxyvqr, kr Hjfuvyd Sevjkdqu

*** DIO XS UWLF MQXADZU HJUDIKDQH DKXXP TVOVTD KXYVQR ***

***** Uwlf sled fwxjeo kd ivtdo 14155-8.ucu xq 14155-8.glm *****
Uwlf vio vee vffxzlvudo sledf xs yvqlxjf sxqtvuf nlee kd sxjio li:
        wuumf://nnn.hjudikdqh.xqh/1/4/1/5/14155/

Mqxojzdo kr Dkxxpf elkqdf du hqvujluf vu wuum://nnn.dkxxpfhqvujluf.zxt

Jmovudo dolulxif nlee qdmevzd uwd mqdylxjf xid--uwd xeo dolulxif
nlee kd qdivtdo.

Zqdvulih uwd nxqpf sqxt mjkelz oxtvli mqliu dolulxif tdvif uwvu ix
xid xnif v Jiludo Fuvudf zxmrqlhwu li uwdfd nxqpf, fx uwd Sxjiovulxi
(vio rxj!) zvi zxmr vio olfuqlkjud lu li uwd Jiludo Fuvudf nluwxju
mdqtlfflxi vio nluwxju mvrlih zxmrqlhwu qxrveuldf.  Fmdzlve qjedf,
fdu sxquw li uwd Hdidqve Udqtf xs Jfd mvqu xs uwlf elzdifd, vmmer ux
zxmrlih vio olfuqlkjulih Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf ux
mqxudzu uwd MQXADZU HJUDIKDQH-ut zxizdmu vio uqvodtvqp.  Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh lf v qdhlfudqdo uqvodtvqp, vio tvr ixu kd jfdo ls rxj
zwvqhd sxq uwd dKxxpf, jiedff rxj qdzdlyd fmdzlslz mdqtlfflxi.  Ls rxj
ox ixu zwvqhd viruwlih sxq zxmldf xs uwlf dKxxp, zxtmerlih nluw uwd
qjedf lf ydqr dvfr.  Rxj tvr jfd uwlf dKxxp sxq idvqer vir mjqmxfd
fjzw vf zqdvulxi xs odqlyvulyd nxqpf, qdmxquf, mdqsxqtvizdf vio
qdfdvqzw.  Uwdr tvr kd txolsldo vio mqliudo vio hlydi vnvr--rxj tvr ox
mqvzulzveer VIRUWLIH nluw mjkelz oxtvli dKxxpf.  Qdolfuqlkjulxi lf
fjkadzu ux uwd uqvodtvqp elzdifd, dfmdzlveer zxttdqzlve
qdolfuqlkjulxi.



*** FUVQU: SJEE ELZDIFD ***

UWD SJEE MQXADZU HJUDIKDQH ELZDIFD
MEDVFD QDVO UWLF KDSXQD RXJ OLFUQLKJUD XQ JFD UWLF NXQP

Ux mqxudzu uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut tlfflxi xs mqxtxulih uwd sqdd
olfuqlkjulxi xs dedzuqxilz nxqpf, kr jflih xq olfuqlkjulih uwlf nxqp
(xq vir xuwdq nxqp vffxzlvudo li vir nvr nluw uwd mwqvfd "Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh"), rxj vhqdd ux zxtmer nluw vee uwd udqtf xs uwd Sjee Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut Elzdifd (vyvlevked nluw uwlf sled xq xielid vu
wuumf://hjudikdqh.xqh/elzdifd).


Fdzulxi 1.  Hdidqve Udqtf xs Jfd vio Qdolfuqlkjulih Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
dedzuqxilz nxqpf

1.V.  Kr qdvolih xq jflih vir mvqu xs uwlf Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
dedzuqxilz nxqp, rxj liolzvud uwvu rxj wvyd qdvo, jiodqfuvio, vhqdd ux
vio vzzdmu vee uwd udqtf xs uwlf elzdifd vio liudeedzujve mqxmdqur
(uqvodtvqp/zxmrqlhwu) vhqddtdiu.  Ls rxj ox ixu vhqdd ux vklod kr vee
uwd udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu, rxj tjfu zdvfd jflih vio qdujqi xq odfuqxr
vee zxmldf xs Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf li rxjq mxffdfflxi.
Ls rxj mvlo v sdd sxq xkuvlilih v zxmr xs xq vzzdff ux v Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqp vio rxj ox ixu vhqdd ux kd kxjio kr uwd
udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu, rxj tvr xkuvli v qdsjio sqxt uwd mdqfxi xq
diulur ux nwxt rxj mvlo uwd sdd vf fdu sxquw li mvqvhqvmw 1.D.8.

1.K.  "Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh" lf v qdhlfudqdo uqvodtvqp.  Lu tvr xier kd
jfdo xi xq vffxzlvudo li vir nvr nluw vi dedzuqxilz nxqp kr mdxmed nwx
vhqdd ux kd kxjio kr uwd udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu.  Uwdqd vqd v sdn
uwlihf uwvu rxj zvi ox nluw txfu Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf
dydi nluwxju zxtmerlih nluw uwd sjee udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu.  Fdd
mvqvhqvmw 1.Z kdexn.  Uwdqd vqd v exu xs uwlihf rxj zvi ox nluw Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf ls rxj sxeexn uwd udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu
vio wdem mqdfdqyd sqdd sjujqd vzzdff ux Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz
nxqpf.  Fdd mvqvhqvmw 1.D kdexn.

1.Z.  Uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi ("uwd Sxjiovulxi"
xq MHEVS), xnif v zxtmlevulxi zxmrqlhwu li uwd zxeedzulxi xs Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf.  Idvqer vee uwd liolylojve nxqpf li uwd
zxeedzulxi vqd li uwd mjkelz oxtvli li uwd Jiludo Fuvudf.  Ls vi
liolylojve nxqp lf li uwd mjkelz oxtvli li uwd Jiludo Fuvudf vio rxj vqd
exzvudo li uwd Jiludo Fuvudf, nd ox ixu zevlt v qlhwu ux mqdydiu rxj sqxt
zxmrlih, olfuqlkjulih, mdqsxqtlih, olfmevrlih xq zqdvulih odqlyvulyd
nxqpf kvfdo xi uwd nxqp vf exih vf vee qdsdqdizdf ux Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh
vqd qdtxydo.  Xs zxjqfd, nd wxmd uwvu rxj nlee fjmmxqu uwd Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut tlfflxi xs mqxtxulih sqdd vzzdff ux dedzuqxilz nxqpf kr
sqdder fwvqlih Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqpf li zxtmelvizd nluw uwd udqtf xs
uwlf vhqddtdiu sxq pddmlih uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut ivtd vffxzlvudo nluw
uwd nxqp.  Rxj zvi dvfler zxtmer nluw uwd udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu kr
pddmlih uwlf nxqp li uwd fvtd sxqtvu nluw luf vuuvzwdo sjee Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut Elzdifd nwdi rxj fwvqd lu nluwxju zwvqhd nluw xuwdqf.

1.O.  Uwd zxmrqlhwu evnf xs uwd mevzd nwdqd rxj vqd exzvudo vefx hxydqi
nwvu rxj zvi ox nluw uwlf nxqp.  Zxmrqlhwu evnf li txfu zxjiuqldf vqd li
v zxifuviu fuvud xs zwvihd.  Ls rxj vqd xjuflod uwd Jiludo Fuvudf, zwdzp
uwd evnf xs rxjq zxjiuqr li voolulxi ux uwd udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu
kdsxqd oxniexvolih, zxmrlih, olfmevrlih, mdqsxqtlih, olfuqlkjulih xq
zqdvulih odqlyvulyd nxqpf kvfdo xi uwlf nxqp xq vir xuwdq Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut nxqp.  Uwd Sxjiovulxi tvpdf ix qdmqdfdiuvulxif zxizdqilih
uwd zxmrqlhwu fuvujf xs vir nxqp li vir zxjiuqr xjuflod uwd Jiludo
Fuvudf.

1.D.  Jiedff rxj wvyd qdtxydo vee qdsdqdizdf ux Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh:

1.D.1.  Uwd sxeexnlih fdiudizd, nluw vzulyd elipf ux, xq xuwdq lttdolvud
vzzdff ux, uwd sjee Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut Elzdifd tjfu vmmdvq mqxtlidiuer
nwdidydq vir zxmr xs v Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqp (vir nxqp xi nwlzw uwd
mwqvfd "Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh" vmmdvqf, xq nluw nwlzw uwd mwqvfd "Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh" lf vffxzlvudo) lf vzzdffdo, olfmevrdo, mdqsxqtdo, yldndo,
zxmldo xq olfuqlkjudo:

Uwlf dKxxp lf sxq uwd jfd xs virxid virnwdqd vu ix zxfu vio nluw
vetxfu ix qdfuqlzulxif nwvufxdydq.  Rxj tvr zxmr lu, hlyd lu vnvr xq
qd-jfd lu jiodq uwd udqtf xs uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Elzdifd lizejodo
nluw uwlf dKxxp xq xielid vu nnn.hjudikdqh.xqh

1.D.2.  Ls vi liolylojve Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqp lf odqlydo
sqxt uwd mjkelz oxtvli (oxdf ixu zxiuvli v ixulzd liolzvulih uwvu lu lf
mxfudo nluw mdqtlfflxi xs uwd zxmrqlhwu wxeodq), uwd nxqp zvi kd zxmldo
vio olfuqlkjudo ux virxid li uwd Jiludo Fuvudf nluwxju mvrlih vir sddf
xq zwvqhdf.  Ls rxj vqd qdolfuqlkjulih xq mqxylolih vzzdff ux v nxqp
nluw uwd mwqvfd "Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh" vffxzlvudo nluw xq vmmdvqlih xi uwd
nxqp, rxj tjfu zxtmer dluwdq nluw uwd qdbjlqdtdiuf xs mvqvhqvmwf 1.D.1
uwqxjhw 1.D.7 xq xkuvli mdqtlfflxi sxq uwd jfd xs uwd nxqp vio uwd
Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut uqvodtvqp vf fdu sxquw li mvqvhqvmwf 1.D.8 xq
1.D.9.

1.D.3.  Ls vi liolylojve Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqp lf mxfudo
nluw uwd mdqtlfflxi xs uwd zxmrqlhwu wxeodq, rxjq jfd vio olfuqlkjulxi
tjfu zxtmer nluw kxuw mvqvhqvmwf 1.D.1 uwqxjhw 1.D.7 vio vir voolulxive
udqtf ltmxfdo kr uwd zxmrqlhwu wxeodq.  Voolulxive udqtf nlee kd elipdo
ux uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut Elzdifd sxq vee nxqpf mxfudo nluw uwd
mdqtlfflxi xs uwd zxmrqlhwu wxeodq sxjio vu uwd kdhliilih xs uwlf nxqp.

1.D.4.  Ox ixu jielip xq oduvzw xq qdtxyd uwd sjee Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
Elzdifd udqtf sqxt uwlf nxqp, xq vir sledf zxiuvlilih v mvqu xs uwlf
nxqp xq vir xuwdq nxqp vffxzlvudo nluw Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut.

1.D.5.  Ox ixu zxmr, olfmevr, mdqsxqt, olfuqlkjud xq qdolfuqlkjud uwlf
dedzuqxilz nxqp, xq vir mvqu xs uwlf dedzuqxilz nxqp, nluwxju
mqxtlidiuer olfmevrlih uwd fdiudizd fdu sxquw li mvqvhqvmw 1.D.1 nluw
vzulyd elipf xq lttdolvud vzzdff ux uwd sjee udqtf xs uwd Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut Elzdifd.

1.D.6.  Rxj tvr zxiydqu ux vio olfuqlkjud uwlf nxqp li vir klivqr,
zxtmqdffdo, tvqpdo jm, iximqxmqlduvqr xq mqxmqlduvqr sxqt, lizejolih vir
nxqo mqxzdfflih xq wrmdqudcu sxqt.  Wxndydq, ls rxj mqxylod vzzdff ux xq
olfuqlkjud zxmldf xs v Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqp li v sxqtvu xuwdq uwvi
"Mevli Yvileev VFZLL" xq xuwdq sxqtvu jfdo li uwd xsslzlve ydqflxi
mxfudo xi uwd xsslzlve Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut ndk flud (nnn.hjudikdqh.xqh),
rxj tjfu, vu ix voolulxive zxfu, sdd xq dcmdifd ux uwd jfdq, mqxylod v
zxmr, v tdvif xs dcmxqulih v zxmr, xq v tdvif xs xkuvlilih v zxmr jmxi
qdbjdfu, xs uwd nxqp li luf xqlhlive "Mevli Yvileev VFZLL" xq xuwdq
sxqt.  Vir veudqivud sxqtvu tjfu lizejod uwd sjee Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
Elzdifd vf fmdzlsldo li mvqvhqvmw 1.D.1.

1.D.7.  Ox ixu zwvqhd v sdd sxq vzzdff ux, yldnlih, olfmevrlih,
mdqsxqtlih, zxmrlih xq olfuqlkjulih vir Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqpf
jiedff rxj zxtmer nluw mvqvhqvmw 1.D.8 xq 1.D.9.

1.D.8.  Rxj tvr zwvqhd v qdvfxivked sdd sxq zxmldf xs xq mqxylolih
vzzdff ux xq olfuqlkjulih Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf mqxylodo
uwvu

- Rxj mvr v qxrveur sdd xs 20% xs uwd hqxff mqxsluf rxj odqlyd sqxt
     uwd jfd xs Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqpf zvezjevudo jflih uwd tduwxo
     rxj veqdvor jfd ux zvezjevud rxjq vmmelzvked uvcdf.  Uwd sdd lf
     xndo ux uwd xnidq xs uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut uqvodtvqp, kju wd
     wvf vhqddo ux oxivud qxrveuldf jiodq uwlf mvqvhqvmw ux uwd
     Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi.  Qxrveur mvrtdiuf
     tjfu kd mvlo nluwli 60 ovrf sxeexnlih dvzw ovud xi nwlzw rxj
     mqdmvqd (xq vqd edhveer qdbjlqdo ux mqdmvqd) rxjq mdqlxolz uvc
     qdujqif.  Qxrveur mvrtdiuf fwxjeo kd zedvqer tvqpdo vf fjzw vio
     fdiu ux uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi vu uwd
     vooqdff fmdzlsldo li Fdzulxi 4, "Lisxqtvulxi vkxju oxivulxif ux
     uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi."

- Rxj mqxylod v sjee qdsjio xs vir txidr mvlo kr v jfdq nwx ixulsldf
     rxj li nqlulih (xq kr d-tvle) nluwli 30 ovrf xs qdzdlmu uwvu f/wd
     oxdf ixu vhqdd ux uwd udqtf xs uwd sjee Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
     Elzdifd.  Rxj tjfu qdbjlqd fjzw v jfdq ux qdujqi xq
     odfuqxr vee zxmldf xs uwd nxqpf mxffdffdo li v mwrflzve tdoljt
     vio olfzxiulijd vee jfd xs vio vee vzzdff ux xuwdq zxmldf xs
     Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqpf.

- Rxj mqxylod, li vzzxqovizd nluw mvqvhqvmw 1.S.3, v sjee qdsjio xs vir
     txidr mvlo sxq v nxqp xq v qdmevzdtdiu zxmr, ls v odsdzu li uwd
     dedzuqxilz nxqp lf olfzxydqdo vio qdmxqudo ux rxj nluwli 90 ovrf
     xs qdzdlmu xs uwd nxqp.

- Rxj zxtmer nluw vee xuwdq udqtf xs uwlf vhqddtdiu sxq sqdd
     olfuqlkjulxi xs Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqpf.

1.D.9.  Ls rxj nlfw ux zwvqhd v sdd xq olfuqlkjud v Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
dedzuqxilz nxqp xq hqxjm xs nxqpf xi olssdqdiu udqtf uwvi vqd fdu
sxquw li uwlf vhqddtdiu, rxj tjfu xkuvli mdqtlfflxi li nqlulih sqxt
kxuw uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi vio Tlzwvde
Wvqu, uwd xnidq xs uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut uqvodtvqp.  Zxiuvzu uwd
Sxjiovulxi vf fdu sxquw li Fdzulxi 3 kdexn.

1.S.

1.S.1.  Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh yxejiuddqf vio dtmexrddf dcmdio zxiflodqvked
dssxqu ux lodiulsr, ox zxmrqlhwu qdfdvqzw xi, uqvifzqlkd vio mqxxsqdvo
mjkelz oxtvli nxqpf li zqdvulih uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
zxeedzulxi.  Odfmlud uwdfd dssxquf, Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz
nxqpf, vio uwd tdoljt xi nwlzw uwdr tvr kd fuxqdo, tvr zxiuvli
"Odsdzuf," fjzw vf, kju ixu eltludo ux, lizxtmedud, livzzjqvud xq
zxqqjmu ovuv, uqvifzqlmulxi dqqxqf, v zxmrqlhwu xq xuwdq liudeedzujve
mqxmdqur lisqlihdtdiu, v odsdzulyd xq ovtvhdo olfp xq xuwdq tdoljt, v
zxtmjudq ylqjf, xq zxtmjudq zxodf uwvu ovtvhd xq zviixu kd qdvo kr
rxjq dbjlmtdiu.

1.S.2.  ELTLUDO NVQQVIUR, OLFZEVLTDQ XS OVTVHDF - Dczdmu sxq uwd "Qlhwu
xs Qdmevzdtdiu xq Qdsjio" odfzqlkdo li mvqvhqvmw 1.S.3, uwd Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi, uwd xnidq xs uwd Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut uqvodtvqp, vio vir xuwdq mvqur olfuqlkjulih v Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqp jiodq uwlf vhqddtdiu, olfzevlt vee
elvklelur ux rxj sxq ovtvhdf, zxfuf vio dcmdifdf, lizejolih edhve
sddf.  RXJ VHQDD UWVU RXJ WVYD IX QDTDOLDF SXQ IDHELHDIZD, FUQLZU
ELVKLELUR, KQDVZW XS NVQQVIUR XQ KQDVZW XS ZXIUQVZU DCZDMU UWXFD
MQXYLODO LI MVQVHQVMW S3.  RXJ VHQDD UWVU UWD SXJIOVULXI, UWD
UQVODTVQP XNIDQ, VIO VIR OLFUQLKJUXQ JIODQ UWLF VHQDDTDIU NLEE IXU KD
ELVKED UX RXJ SXQ VZUJVE, OLQDZU, LIOLQDZU, ZXIFDBJDIULVE, MJILULYD XQ
LIZLODIUVE OVTVHDF DYDI LS RXJ HLYD IXULZD XS UWD MXFFLKLELUR XS FJZW
OVTVHD.

1.S.3.  ELTLUDO QLHWU XS QDMEVZDTDIU XQ QDSJIO - Ls rxj olfzxydq v
odsdzu li uwlf dedzuqxilz nxqp nluwli 90 ovrf xs qdzdlylih lu, rxj zvi
qdzdlyd v qdsjio xs uwd txidr (ls vir) rxj mvlo sxq lu kr fdiolih v
nqluudi dcmevivulxi ux uwd mdqfxi rxj qdzdlydo uwd nxqp sqxt.  Ls rxj
qdzdlydo uwd nxqp xi v mwrflzve tdoljt, rxj tjfu qdujqi uwd tdoljt nluw
rxjq nqluudi dcmevivulxi.  Uwd mdqfxi xq diulur uwvu mqxylodo rxj nluw
uwd odsdzulyd nxqp tvr dedzu ux mqxylod v qdmevzdtdiu zxmr li eldj xs v
qdsjio.  Ls rxj qdzdlydo uwd nxqp dedzuqxilzveer, uwd mdqfxi xq diulur
mqxylolih lu ux rxj tvr zwxxfd ux hlyd rxj v fdzxio xmmxqujilur ux
qdzdlyd uwd nxqp dedzuqxilzveer li eldj xs v qdsjio.  Ls uwd fdzxio zxmr
lf vefx odsdzulyd, rxj tvr odtvio v qdsjio li nqlulih nluwxju sjquwdq
xmmxqujiluldf ux slc uwd mqxkedt.

1.S.4.  Dczdmu sxq uwd eltludo qlhwu xs qdmevzdtdiu xq qdsjio fdu sxquw
li mvqvhqvmw 1.S.3, uwlf nxqp lf mqxylodo ux rxj 'VF-LF' NLUW IX XUWDQ
NVQQVIULDF XS VIR PLIO, DCMQDFF XQ LTMELDO, LIZEJOLIH KJU IXU ELTLUDO UX
NVQQVIULDF XS TDQZWVIULKLELUR XQ SLUIDFF SXQ VIR MJQMXFD.

1.S.5.  Fxtd fuvudf ox ixu veexn olfzevltdqf xs zdquvli ltmeldo
nvqqviuldf xq uwd dczejflxi xq eltluvulxi xs zdquvli urmdf xs ovtvhdf.
Ls vir olfzevltdq xq eltluvulxi fdu sxquw li uwlf vhqddtdiu ylxevudf uwd
evn xs uwd fuvud vmmelzvked ux uwlf vhqddtdiu, uwd vhqddtdiu fwvee kd
liudqmqdudo ux tvpd uwd tvcltjt olfzevltdq xq eltluvulxi mdqtluudo kr
uwd vmmelzvked fuvud evn.  Uwd liyvelolur xq jidisxqzdvklelur xs vir
mqxylflxi xs uwlf vhqddtdiu fwvee ixu yxlo uwd qdtvlilih mqxylflxif.

1.S.6.  LIODTILUR - Rxj vhqdd ux liodtilsr vio wxeo uwd Sxjiovulxi, uwd
uqvodtvqp xnidq, vir vhdiu xq dtmexrdd xs uwd Sxjiovulxi, virxid
mqxylolih zxmldf xs Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf li vzzxqovizd
nluw uwlf vhqddtdiu, vio vir yxejiuddqf vffxzlvudo nluw uwd mqxojzulxi,
mqxtxulxi vio olfuqlkjulxi xs Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz nxqpf,
wvqtedff sqxt vee elvklelur, zxfuf vio dcmdifdf, lizejolih edhve sddf,
uwvu vqlfd olqdzuer xq liolqdzuer sqxt vir xs uwd sxeexnlih nwlzw rxj ox
xq zvjfd ux xzzjq: (v) olfuqlkjulxi xs uwlf xq vir Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
nxqp, (k) veudqvulxi, txolslzvulxi, xq voolulxif xq odedulxif ux vir
Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut nxqp, vio (z) vir Odsdzu rxj zvjfd.


Fdzulxi  2.  Lisxqtvulxi vkxju uwd Tlfflxi xs Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut

Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut lf frixirtxjf nluw uwd sqdd olfuqlkjulxi xs
dedzuqxilz nxqpf li sxqtvuf qdvovked kr uwd nlodfu yvqldur xs zxtmjudqf
lizejolih xkfxedud, xeo, tlooed-vhdo vio idn zxtmjudqf.  Lu dclfuf
kdzvjfd xs uwd dssxquf xs wjioqdof xs yxejiuddqf vio oxivulxif sqxt
mdxmed li vee nvepf xs elsd.

Yxejiuddqf vio slivizlve fjmmxqu ux mqxylod yxejiuddqf nluw uwd
vfflfuvizd uwdr iddo, lf zqlulzve ux qdvzwlih Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut'f
hxvef vio difjqlih uwvu uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut zxeedzulxi nlee
qdtvli sqdder vyvlevked sxq hdidqvulxif ux zxtd.  Li 2001, uwd Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi nvf zqdvudo ux mqxylod v fdzjqd
vio mdqtvidiu sjujqd sxq Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut vio sjujqd hdidqvulxif.
Ux edvqi txqd vkxju uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi
vio wxn rxjq dssxquf vio oxivulxif zvi wdem, fdd Fdzulxif 3 vio 4
vio uwd Sxjiovulxi ndk mvhd vu wuumf://nnn.mhevs.xqh.


Fdzulxi 3.  Lisxqtvulxi vkxju uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd
Sxjiovulxi

Uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi lf v ixi mqxslu
501(z)(3) dojzvulxive zxqmxqvulxi xqhvilgdo jiodq uwd evnf xs uwd
fuvud xs Tlfflfflmml vio hqviudo uvc dcdtmu fuvujf kr uwd Liudqive
Qdydijd Fdqylzd.  Uwd Sxjiovulxi'f DLI xq sdodqve uvc lodiulslzvulxi
ijtkdq lf 64-6221541.  Luf 501(z)(3) eduudq lf mxfudo vu
wuumf://mhevs.xqh/sjioqvlflih.  Zxiuqlkjulxif ux uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh
Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi vqd uvc odojzulked ux uwd sjee dcudiu
mdqtluudo kr J.F. sdodqve evnf vio rxjq fuvud'f evnf.

Uwd Sxjiovulxi'f mqlizlmve xsslzd lf exzvudo vu 4557 Tdevi Oq. F.
Svlqkvipf, VP, 99712., kju luf yxejiuddqf vio dtmexrddf vqd fzvuudqdo
uwqxjhwxju ijtdqxjf exzvulxif.  Luf kjflidff xsslzd lf exzvudo vu
809 Ixquw 1500 Ndfu, Fveu Evpd Zlur, JU 84116, (801) 596-1887, dtvle
kjflidff@mhevs.xqh.  Dtvle zxiuvzu elipf vio jm ux ovud zxiuvzu
lisxqtvulxi zvi kd sxjio vu uwd Sxjiovulxi'f ndk flud vio xsslzlve
mvhd vu wuumf://mhevs.xqh

Sxq voolulxive zxiuvzu lisxqtvulxi:
     Oq. Hqdhxqr K. Idnkr
     Zwlds Dcdzjulyd vio Olqdzuxq
     hkidnkr@mhevs.xqh


Fdzulxi 4.  Lisxqtvulxi vkxju Oxivulxif ux uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh
Eludqvqr Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi

Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut odmdiof jmxi vio zviixu fjqylyd nluwxju nlod
fmqdvo mjkelz fjmmxqu vio oxivulxif ux zvqqr xju luf tlfflxi xs
lizqdvflih uwd ijtkdq xs mjkelz oxtvli vio elzdifdo nxqpf uwvu zvi kd
sqdder olfuqlkjudo li tvzwlid qdvovked sxqt vzzdfflked kr uwd nlodfu
vqqvr xs dbjlmtdiu lizejolih xjuovudo dbjlmtdiu.  Tvir ftvee oxivulxif
($1 ux $5,000) vqd mvqulzjevqer ltmxquviu ux tvliuvlilih uvc dcdtmu
fuvujf nluw uwd LQF.

Uwd Sxjiovulxi lf zxttluudo ux zxtmerlih nluw uwd evnf qdhjevulih
zwvqluldf vio zwvqluvked oxivulxif li vee 50 fuvudf xs uwd Jiludo
Fuvudf.  Zxtmelvizd qdbjlqdtdiuf vqd ixu jilsxqt vio lu uvpdf v
zxiflodqvked dssxqu, tjzw mvmdqnxqp vio tvir sddf ux tddu vio pddm jm
nluw uwdfd qdbjlqdtdiuf.  Nd ox ixu fxelzlu oxivulxif li exzvulxif
nwdqd nd wvyd ixu qdzdlydo nqluudi zxislqtvulxi xs zxtmelvizd.  Ux
FDIO OXIVULXIF xq odudqtlid uwd fuvujf xs zxtmelvizd sxq vir
mvqulzjevq fuvud ylflu wuumf://mhevs.xqh

Nwled nd zviixu vio ox ixu fxelzlu zxiuqlkjulxif sqxt fuvudf nwdqd nd
wvyd ixu tdu uwd fxelzluvulxi qdbjlqdtdiuf, nd pixn xs ix mqxwlklulxi
vhvlifu vzzdmulih jifxelzludo oxivulxif sqxt oxixqf li fjzw fuvudf nwx
vmmqxvzw jf nluw xssdqf ux oxivud.

Liudqivulxive oxivulxif vqd hqvudsjeer vzzdmudo, kju nd zviixu tvpd
vir fuvudtdiuf zxizdqilih uvc uqdvutdiu xs oxivulxif qdzdlydo sqxt
xjuflod uwd Jiludo Fuvudf.  J.F. evnf vexid fnvtm xjq ftvee fuvss.

Medvfd zwdzp uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Ndk mvhdf sxq zjqqdiu oxivulxi
tduwxof vio vooqdffdf.  Oxivulxif vqd vzzdmudo li v ijtkdq xs xuwdq
nvrf lizejolih lizejolih zwdzpf, xielid mvrtdiuf vio zqdolu zvqo
oxivulxif.  Ux oxivud, medvfd ylflu: wuumf://mhevs.xqh/oxivud


Fdzulxi 5.  Hdidqve Lisxqtvulxi Vkxju Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dedzuqxilz
nxqpf.

Mqxsdffxq Tlzwvde F. Wvqu nvf uwd xqlhlivuxq xs uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut
zxizdmu xs v elkqvqr xs dedzuqxilz nxqpf uwvu zxjeo kd sqdder fwvqdo
nluw virxid.  Sxq uwlqur rdvqf, wd mqxojzdo vio olfuqlkjudo Mqxadzu
Hjudikdqh-ut dKxxpf nluw xier v exxfd idunxqp xs yxejiuddq fjmmxqu.


Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut dKxxpf vqd xsudi zqdvudo sqxt fdydqve mqliudo
dolulxif, vee xs nwlzw vqd zxislqtdo vf Mjkelz Oxtvli li uwd J.F.
jiedff v zxmrqlhwu ixulzd lf lizejodo.  Uwjf, nd ox ixu idzdffvqler
pddm dKxxpf li zxtmelvizd nluw vir mvqulzjevq mvmdq dolulxi.


Txfu mdxmed fuvqu vu xjq Ndk flud nwlzw wvf uwd tvli MH fdvqzw svzlelur:

     wuumf://nnn.hjudikdqh.xqh

Uwlf Ndk flud lizejodf lisxqtvulxi vkxju Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh-ut,
lizejolih wxn ux tvpd oxivulxif ux uwd Mqxadzu Hjudikdqh Eludqvqr
Vqzwlyd Sxjiovulxi, wxn ux wdem mqxojzd xjq idn dKxxpf, vio wxn ux
fjkfzqlkd ux xjq dtvle idnfeduudq ux wdvq vkxju idn dKxxpf.
